To the west meanwhile, there were other enemies. Throughout January and February, 1978, a Special Branch informer had been monitoring a ZIPRA presence near his kraal close to the Botswana/Rhodesia border - and it had become very apparent that ZIPRA had set up another transit camp inside Botswana.
The Botswana Government’s policy had always been to give sanctuary to Rhodesian “refugees~ as well as ZIPRA deploying from Rhodesia for rearmament and test and recreation.
The so-called “refugees” were largely ZIPRA recruits - volunteers or abducted teenagers - who, after undergoing training in Zambia or elsewhere, returned home as fully-fledged terrorists. It was estimated that eighty percent of ZIPRA were taken at gunpoint through Botswana.
In August, 1976, the Lusaka-based ZlPRA high command had dispatched the influential Dumiso Dabengwa to Francistown to persuade the Botswanan Government to allow an intensification of the terrorist war effort Dabengwa wanted Botswana’s authority to infiltrate large numbers of armed men into Rhodesia via the common Botswana/Rhodesia border. Although the request was reportedly denied by Botswana. which had always claimed it maintained a neutral stance, ZIPRA’s activities began to increase almost immediately.
Botswana-based ZIPRA hierarchy were responsible for masterminding an upsurge in recruiting and abduction campaigns within Rhodesia ... as well as an increase in acts of terrorism along the Bulawayo/Plumtree railway line robberies, landmine incidents, disciplinary killings and attacks on isolated farmers ...
The latest intelligence coming in to Victoria Falls-based SB Officer Mike Howie put the new ZiPRA transit camp about 15 kilometres (nine miles) south of Kazangula and some six kilometres (four miles) across the border inside Botswana. It was an ideal site, affording ZIPRA a quick and uninterrupted supply and deployment route into Matabeleland.
When the SB officer’s informer made yet another report about the suspected camp, Mike Howie decided the time had come for a further investigation. The SAS’s “B” Troop, were based up at the game rangers’ houses on the banks of the Zambezi, a few kilometres from Victoria Falls, and he had a quiet word to the Troop’s new commander, Captain Colin Willis, about the latest ZIPRA threat.
The SAS were only too willing to help, Colin said ... and a four-man reconnaissance team was tasked to pinpoint the camp. (The SAS were now operating in three external countries at once.)
At sunset that night, the recce team crossed unseen into Botswana and it didn’t take them long to travel the few kilometres to the area under suspicion. Having sought the safety of a small escarpment, they settled down to watch for any signs of ZlPRA.
They overlooked a large open area - there was a small quarry with water in it, a couple of villages… and, on the other side of the clearing, there was a wooded area.
Two uneventful days and nights passed without any sign of ZIPRA. Then, on the third night, 18 healthy young men stepped out of the trees into the clearing. Some wore drab green uniforms, others were in khaki and the rest were in East German flek pattern. They were in a very regimented sort of group, although they carded no weapons.
The SAS watched intently as the 18 youths prepared to hold a meeting. It was very apparent that this was no ordinary group of youths milling around. One man very soon emerged as their leader and whenever he spoke, the others showed obedience to him.
Then, their business over, they dispersed. Five youths strolled off to bathe in the quarry where they removed and replaced three sets of clothing, a very significant move, as terrorists operating inside Rhodesia often wore more than one set of civilian clothing or uniforms, or both, to enable them to merge with the population and to outsmart the security forces.
There was no doubt in the minds of the reconnaissance team that the group was ZIPRA. They were convinced, too, that their camp had to be behind the far treeline. Ideally, the SAS needed to carry out a close-in reconnaissance to confirm their suspicions. But the reconnaissance commander was suffering from ticklish nighttime coughing attacks, the result of a chest infection, and that idea was abandoned. A simple cough could give the game away and the commander was not prepared to take that chance.
They radioed base to report the presence of ZIPRA to Colin Willis... and it was agreed that they return to Rhodesia the following morning, when Colin planned to retask another commander to do the close-in reconnaissance.

Next day, SB officer Mike Howie was due for another intelligence gathering meeting with his informer friend on the Rhodesian side of the border on the main Victoria Falls/Kazangula Road.
SAS Territorial Captain Jeff Telfer was to go along for the ride, and when the new SAS doctor, Jon Thomson, heard about the trip, he tried to cadge a lift too.
The doctor had just passed selection and his parachute course but still had another two weeks to go before his orientation course - to check and complete the training of attached personnel - after which he would qualify for SAS colours.
But Jon was getting fed up with hanging about. He hadn’t joined the SAS to sit around the camp, he complained. He wanted a bit of action... and the commander finally agreed to let him go along on the trip... then asked the three men to try raising the SAS reconnaissance party on their radio as his own communications with them were not good.
The SB officer met up with his hunter informer and a couple of other agents, and they produced a hand grenade found in Botswana ... yet more evidence of a ZlPRA presence.
Then the three men set off on the return journey, and, instead of going back the way they had come, they travelled down the narrow, seldom-used dirt road close to the four-strand barbed wire cattle fence that separated Rhodesia from her western neighbour.
It was a particularly bad road. fraught with danger for unsuspecting travellers... an ideal spot for terrorists who might care to leave a few lethal surprises planted along the lonely, dusty track.
Only a couple of weeks before, Mike Howie had chanced upon a landmine. A nosey elephant had sniffed at it, disturbing the red soil sufficiently for Mike to see it.
The SB officer had lifted it, then continued on his way... only to find more evidence of another landmine a few kilometres further along the road. Next to a huge crater gouged out by an exploding landmine, lay one very dead elephant.
Mike Howie decided that they would go a little further down the road before trying to make radio communications with the SAS reconnaissance party now making their way back to Rhodesia.
Suddenly, an almighty bang reverberated around the Land-Rover, and all three men thought that was it - they had hit a landmine. Then they heard the rattle of smallarms fire and saw tracer screaming past the windscreen, and realised that men were firing at them from just twenty metres away.
The explosion had not come from a landmine after all but from an RPG-7 rocket which had missed the Land-Rover, but exploded nearby, sending shrapnel showering in all directions.
Standing in the waist-high grass of the marshland were ten very aggressive ZiPRA ... and directing an incredible volume of fire at them.
The enterprising enemy, in Rhodesia on a reconnaissance mission, had quickly sprung into their ambush positions the moment they heard the Land-Rover crunching towards them, and, thinking it had to be the routine Kazangola police patrol vehicle, they were agreed it was too good an opportunity to pass up.
For the three Rhodesians, there was no time to be lost.
Mike Howie put his foot down flat... and with Jeff Telfer and Jon Thomson giving covering fire out of the door, they emptied their magazines as the Land-Rover sped through the ambush. A hail of lead followed their every move.
In the split seconds it was taking to change magazines, left told his companions that he had been shot. He had taken a hit in the fool not that it deterred him from keeping the ZlPRA attackers at bay.
“I’ve been hit too,” Mike suddenly said, as the police Land-Rover lurched along kicking up a cloud of dust all around them. The doctor noted that Mike was already turning a sickly shade of white. Mike’s left leg had been shattered. His right leg was also injured, but, fortunately, he was still able to operate the accelerator. But he was so badly shot up, that he couldn’t change gear.
ZiPRA were still firing at them, and it was imperative the three men get clear of the ambush. Quickly. they made a plan.
With the SB man accelerating with his good foot and steering, and the doctor in the centre operating the clutch and changing gears, they roared off, while Jeff Telfer continued to give covering fire as before. But Mike was on the verge of collapsing at the wheel, and warned his friends he was about to pass out.
“No! No! Carry on!” he heard a voice urge. And although extremely weak, the SB officer managed to obey the command and remain conscious.
The vehicle lurched faster and faster down the rough track. Then its tyres burst. On and on they sped. desperately trying to put as much space as possible between them and their attackers.
Only when the ambushers were a good three kilometres behind them and the sounds of firing had died down, did Mike Howie feel they were relatively safe at last. He brought the Land-Rover to a grinding halt... and his ~wo companions carefully lifted him from the driver’s seat and laid him next to the vehicle.
It was only now that the doctor realised just how bad the SB officer’s injuries were. Both main bones in his leg were severed… and his leg was literally hanging on by the skin. Everything pointed to him losing the limb.
The doctor found a medical kit behind the driver’s seat, got a drip going, and administered a pain killer. Then, he turned to deal with Jeff Telfer’s injury, finding that a round had passed through his foot. Jeff was wearing a beautiful pair of imported running shoes - his pride and joy - and one very blood-stained shoe was eased off and his injury patched up.
Jeff set about trying to make communications with someone to report the ambush. But he was unable to raise Colin Willis back in Victoria Falls on the army radio and tried the police radio in the Land-Rover.
The Kazangula police patrol was due along the road, and it was imperative they be warned not to come, for there was a very real possibility that the ambushers had also planted a landmine in the road.
Only then did the SAS doctor realise that he too had been shot in the foot. It was not as bad as the others’, but sore nonetheless. Leaving Mike groaning and Jeff trying to raise someone on the radio, Jon Thomson hobbled off to lay an ambush in case ZIPRA decided to follow-up.
As he lay in his ambush site, trying to ignore his injury and concentrate on the broken ground ahead and watch all sides at once, he worried that ZIPRA would try and outflank them. He rather hoped they didn’t come along at all Both of his companions were injured and he was alone in his little ambush position. He hadn’t been properly trained yet. He had never seen a shot fired in anger, Hell, he thought to himself he hadn’t even got his SAS beret ye~
The minutes ticked .by slowly as he kept up his lonely vigil.
Back down the road, Jeff Teller had finally managed to get word to the police station about the ambush... and the news was quickly passed back to Colin Willis who immediately dispatched a casevac chopper to the scene with a medic on board.
Meanwhile, the SAS reconnaissance party, had crossed back into Rhodesia, and heard the sounds of firing... and when the news of the ambush was flashed to them, they raced to the rescue.
By now, the ZIPRA responsible for the troubles that morning had hotfooted it back across the border to the safety of Botswana, leaving a legacy of three injured Rhodesians... a reconnaissance team hurrying through the bush to their colleagues’ aid... a casevac chopper on its way to the scene - and, one very upset SAS commander.
Colin immediately radioed ComOps for permission to conduct a hot pursuit follow-up from the ambush area into Botswana to track down the men responsible. Then he had to wait for an answer.

Forty-five long worrying minutes after the ambush was mounted, Mike Howie, Jeff Teifer and Jon Thomson saw the friendly faces of the SAS reconnaissance team emerge through the bush. Within minutes, the casevac chopper had touched down and they were loaded aboard.
The chopper was soon at Victoria Falls airstrip, where Sergeant Major Peter Cole was already waiting for the casualties with an ambulance. Then he and Doc Thomson put a fresh drip in Mike Howie while they awaited the arrival of an aircraft to fly all three casualties to Wankie Hospital.
Just before the plane arrived, an agitated Jeff Telfer shouted across to the sergeant major. Presenting him with his blood-stained track shoe, Jeff instructed him: “Look after that for me. It’s imported. It was very expensive. And can you get it scrubbed clean? Put it in the sun to dry and make sure it’s returned to me personally.” Back at base, meanwhile, Colin Willis had gathered together 27 men in readiness for a hot pursuit operation. But official word hadn’t yet come and time was running out.
They boarded their troop carrier and shot off along the narrow, dusty road that ran along the Zambezi. Colin intended joining forces with the reconnaissance party, still out in the bush, and once ComOps had given permission, they would all get to grips with the ZIPRA ambushers,
On their way, they passed the sergeant major stopping long enough for Colin to tell him to “hold the fort” while they were away. Then, with a roar and a cloud of dust they were on their way, leaving a disgruntled SSM in a dust-covered ambulance, nursing a bloodied trackshoe and rather hoping they wouldn’t find any terrorists, as he would be missing out on the action.
He sat staring at the trackshoe, silently cursing the officer who shouldn’t have been wearing them in the first place. He suddenly let out the clutch and the ambulance leapt forward as he returned to camp and follow his orders to hold the fort.

As Colin and his men roared along the dusty track, he silently debated what would be the best course of action. He knew that before he could do anything he needed ComOps authority. He radioed back to base to be told that ComOps had now approved a hot pursuit operation into Botswana.
But, when he weighed up the evidence, the SAS commander decided against following the spoor. He would go straight to the suspected terrorist camp instead.
After all, their reconnaissance had just confirmed a definite ZIPRA presence in the area. Not only that, but the suspected camp was very close to the ambush site.
Time was of the essence and the commander reasoned that if they were to get their men, they ought to go straight to the camp, assess the situation, then decide what to do. If there were no ZIPRA to be seen, they would return to the ambush site inside Rhodesia and start tracking the enemy down from there.
They met up with the reconnaissance team and the whole force of 33 men crossed the border. It had now been five hours since the ambush.
The reconnaissance commander led them to a hill in more or less the same position where his team had spent the previous few days. Leaving the others behind, the recce commander, Colin and Lieutenant Dale Scott moved down to a good spot overlooking the area where they suspected the camp to be. The recce commander gave a short orientation briefing and pointed out where ZIPRA had been the day before.
They didn’t have too long to wait to see their first ZIPRA emerge from the trees. Colin was quite convinced the man was ZIPRA. He was wearing the same sort of uniform that ZIPRA operating in that area usually had, and he carried an SKS rifle.
There were a number of similarly dressed men moving in and out of the treeline.
Colin was studying the area very carefully and doing a mental appreciation on how they would attack the camp should he decide that was the best plan.
Off in the distance, the sound of vehicles could be heard. Shortly afterwards three Botswana Defence Force Land-Rovers came roaring along the dusty track. To the amazement of the SAS men, the Land-Rovers screeched to a halt and parked right in front of the suspected camp. One of the 18 men on the BDF vehicles was dressed in East German flek camouflage, the sort worn by ZIPRA.
Colin and crew, hidden 400 metres from the little track, were now taking a very keen interest in the goings on below them.
The SAS commander now faced a dilemma. Was this a genuine ZIPRA camp? Or was it a Botswana Defence Force patrol base? If it were a terrorist camp - and everything pointed to it being one - all well and good. If, on the other hand, it was a Botswana defence base, then it was not such a clear-cut situation.
If they attacked it and it turned out to be the latter, unpleasant things would start hitting the fan. And Colin would be up to his neck in it.
Then, as the Rhodesians watched, a lone ZIPRA man came from the camp and spoke to the 18 men on the BDF Land-Rovers. The entire group moved into the camp. Colin and his team could not see what was going on in the treeline, but twenty minutes later, they saw them all come out again.
As they emerged from the trees, it was very apparent the BDF were escorting a group of terrorists, and it seemed to the SAS commander that they were the best of friends.
There was a marked difference in their uniforms, walk and tidiness. The BDF were well turned out in their normal kit; ZIPRA were in the usual assortment of camouflage and civilian clothing The BDF carried pistols, sub-machineguns and FN rifles; the terrorists had communist weapons.
The BDF escorts were carrying the same heavy packs that were being carried by the terrorists. Together, they were heaving kit and equipment, landmines and ammunition-type boxes - and it was all being loaded into the BDF Land-Rovers. The evidence all pointed to this little scenario being a pick-up.
The SAS had never come across or heard of open collaboration between the BDF and ZIPRA before, but it seemed clear to Colin that somehow the BDF had heard obviously on their radios - that the Rhodesian security forces were abroad on a follow-up and were worried that the ZIPRA camp would be located. And that would prove embarrassing to the Botswana Government which firmly maintained it hosted “refugees” only, and not ZIPRA.
It was obvious that ZIPRA were being moved away to start their troubles afresh somewhere else.
For Colin, time was running out. He had to make an on-the-spot decision whether to let them get away - or, put a stop to them then and there.
All the evidence and the events earlier that day were too overwhelming As far as he could see, there was only one course of action that he could take.
To hell with it! He wasn’t going to let them get away. If the BDF wanted to get involved with ZIPRA, then they must suffer the consequences.
“We’re going for it,” he said in a whisper to the two men at his side.
Quickly, quietly, they left their hideout and scrambled 100 metres uphill to the rest of the party. Colin hastily briefed them about what he had seen and what the plan was to be. They moved off briskly in extended line. Time was not on their side and they needed to get into an ambush position down by the road before the BDF vehicles came along.
They were half way to the road when they heard the sound of vehicle engines suddenly rumble into life. Immediately, the SAS were off and running.

As the Land-Rovers roared nearer, the Rhodesians maintained their extended line and arrived in some semblance of ambush overlooking the road at about the same time the first BDF Land-Rover swung around the corner.
Some of the SAS went straight into a kneeling position readying themselves for the contact. A few chose to stand. There was no time to decide who should go where. In any event, there was very little cover and they knew they would be visible from the road.
They could see six ZIPRA among the 18 BDF men in the three Land-Rover. Then, when the front Land-Rover came into the killing ground. Colin, still standing, lined his first victim in his sights.
The unsuspecting man was sitting on the bonnet of the Land-Rover acting as a scout or landmine sentry. The SAS commander took aim and opened fire.
As the round thumped into the man’s chest, it catapulted him off the vehicle and into the dust, That was the signal for the commander’s men to follow suit with rifles and machineguns... and the volume of fire was intense and devastating. In less than a minute, all three Land-Rovers had ground to a halt and were raging infernos.
So intense and fierce was the attack and so taken unaware were the victims, that the BDF and ZIPRA got off only a few shots in return. They were far more interested in getting out of the Land-Rovers than fighting it out.
Some of the passengers managed to clamber out of the blazing vehicles, only to be picked off as they attempted to scale a three-metre high embankment in their bid to escape. Burning and wounded, they slithered to the bottom of the hill to form a mound of bodies.
Five somehow managed to clear the summit and escape with their lives by a miracle, getting away under cover of the dust kicked up from the gun fire and the pall of smoke that hung in the air.
Within minutes it was all over and the commander had waved the ceasefire.
Once the firing died down, Colin decided to wait where they were until the flames were snuffed out. They should really be pulling out before the escapees raised the alarm. But Colin wanted to collect the weapons, even those that had been partly burned as well as cartridge cases that lay around. Ballistic tests would prove conclusively that there had been ZIPRA on the BDF vehicles.
He didn’t need a crystal ball to realise that any incident directly involving the Botswanans would cause shock waves throughout the sub-continent and heighten tensions even more in the region. Without definite ballistic evidence he doubted if the world would believe the Rhodesians’ story.
Judging by the amount of weapons they collected, none of the ZIPRA men had escaped the ambush. Four of the bodies were positively identified as being ZIPRA from the rice-fiek uniforms and the usual terrorist boot patterns. Some of the BDF men too had paid the ultimate price for supporting ZIPRA,
Heavily-laden with their evidence, the SAS ambushers returned to their base in Rhodesia where the sergeant major was anxiously awaiting them.
Things were already buzzing, he reported. ComOps had been on, Army HQ had been on, everyone wanted to know where the ambush party was - and, more particularly, what had happened.
For, even as Colin and his men were still leaving Botswana. the news had already broken via diplomatic circles, The Rhodesian Ministry of Foreign Affairs had already learned a BDF convoy had been ambushed and destroyed. Foreign Affairs Minister P.K, van der Byl was in the hot seat and had to know what had taken place.
The Botswana Government was claiming the attacked men were all from a paramilitary unit, that they had been carrying out a normal border control duty, and that the Rhodesians had acted without provocation, murdering their men in cold blood.
To suggest that the BDF was collaborating with ZIPRA was a “blatant lie”.
It was a grossly-exaggerated story to save face. But, be that as it may. ComOps was not amused, and it looked like Colin was in hot water.
The SAS hierarchy immediately flew down to listen to Colin’s version of the story.
Then they all had to await the findings of the ballistics reports on the weapons and ammunition found at the first ambush site inside Rhodesia as well as those collected from the second ambush attack in Botswana.
The immediate reaction from the Botswana Government was to close the Kazangula border with Rhodesia, which was a considerable blow for trade in the region.
The border position was one of the most strategic points between black and white Africa being where four countries met on the Zambezi - Rhodesia, Zambia, Botswana and South West Africa (Namibia). It was the only remaining link between white and black Africa since the Zambia-Rhodesia border closure in the early 1970s.
The matter was raised at the United Nations and a ballistics expert was dispatched to Rhodesia to make his findings. Eventually, the Rhodesians were able to prove their case and prove the Botswana Government wrong.
Cartridge cases collected from the first ambush were identified by ballistics experts as having been fired by the same weapons captured at the second ambush involving the BDF. They were also tied into documents relating to ZIPRA weapons held by SB in Bulawayo.
Despite being found with egg on their faces, the Botswanans, taught a very severe lesson, would not back down and the border remained closed.
As for the three men injured in the initial ambush. Mike Howie luckily did not lose his leg... Jon Thomson went on to earn his coveted SAS beret... and Jeff Telfer was reunited with his expensive blood-free trackshoes, and vowed never to take them to the bush again.