By September. there were 2 000 ZANLA at what had become known to the security forces as the Chimoio Circle, the area north of the old Chimoio camp site, attacked by the Rhodesians the previous November.
Gaining clearance to mount another camp attack proved a lot easier the second time around. It had been done before and had proved successful. There had been no great international outcry - a few rumblings at the UN; then the world got on with its business. Besides, this time, the intelligence people were able to prove that four white Rhodesians, abducted from their homes a few months earlier, were being held at the new Chimoio.
ComOps gave their blessing - and on September 20, another major external, involving the SAS, RLI and air force was mounted on Chimoio.
The plan had been to attack the new base and then to destroy large amounts of periphery camps that had existed in the area for a number of years.
Initially there were only a few enemy to be seen in the new camp and it appeared it had been abandoned. But as the troops prepared to pull out, a Lynx carrying out a reconnaissance on the periphery area was shot at 35 kilometres (22 miles) to the south. Troops were sent to investigate and came under fire from a different place.
Reinforcements choppered in from the abandoned camps also met the same determined resistance… while, practically every aircraft over the new target was spotting trenches… tracks ... and small camps - and drawing heavy anti-aircraft fire.
The new target was ten times bigger than the Rhodesians had originally thought being thirty kilometres ( 19 miles) by forty kilometres (25 miles), comprising dozens of small camps, many gun positions, an extensive trench system and wide scatterings of very angry and determined ZANLA. Soon, virtually every callsign was having contact after contact, and because the targets and security forces were so spread out, it was very difficult to use air support effectively.
The pilots were having an extremely difficult time pinpointing their targets, and to add to their problems, the haze that hung over the target worsened once the camps began burning.
Day two was no better - and the Canberras were running in one direction ... Hunters were doing high altitude pinpoint diving strikes in another... Lynxes were milling around… helicopters were dodging in and out… and it was happening in various stages of daylight and twilight and was so confusing, it was difficult for the airborne commanders to keep a grip on the situation on the ground.
During the confusion a tragic mistake was made when a pilot bombed a hill occupied by the SAS and Trooper Steve Donnelly was mortally wounded by a sliver of bomb casing. It had been a genuine mistake and a direct result of the appalling haze which enveloped the camp that day. The SAS, fully appreciating the difficult circumstances that had existed, never held a grudge, nor did they allow the incident to mar the excellent working relationship they had with The Blues.
Nine FRELIMO tanks arrived to harass the Rhodesians during the night, but apart from blundering around through the darkness and keeping everyone awake, no serious damage was done.
Next morning when the tanks had left, a search was made for the four white prisoners, but there was no trace. Only an old ledger containing their names and the campaign medals belonging to a 61-year-old retired British Army major, Tom Wigglesworth.
Three Russian armoured personnel carriers which arrived in the camp were destroyed by Hunters, and later that night, an RLI contingent attacked and destroyed another and killed ten FRELIMO.
On day three, the Rhodesians pulled out, leaving behind dozens of dead enemy as well as the main HQ and numerous bases razed to the ground.
The security forces had encountered much tougher resistance than normal and had experienced the heaviest anti-aircraft fire to date with a large number of aircraft hit by smallarms and missile fire. The Rhodesians simply didn’t have the resources to keep the action going or the manpower to take on a camp spread over such a vast area.
For the four white abductees subsequently moved to Tembue camp in the north however, the operation had been a success. SB were able to produce the captured documents to the International Red Cross, and it was exactly the lever needed to ensure their release.
Five months later, they were handed over to Amnesty International and flown home… and Tom Wigglesworth was finally reunited with his medals. Commenting about the return of the medals in his own book about his captivity and hardships, he said: “Truth is certainly stranger than fiction, and l would have had difficulty in believing that if I had read it in a book.”