“If we worried about what the west says,
 we would have had our necks wrung a long
time ago”... LIEUTENANT-GENERAL PETER WALLS
Rhodesia now began to turn her undivided attention to Zambia. The SAS had of course, been in and out of Zambia since the beginning of the year, destroying ZIPRA camps ... springing ambushes, and laying landmines. And in an operation led by Mac McIntosh, 17 enemy boats were destroyed on the Zambian shore of Lake Kariba.
But as was the way of SAS operations, it had all been low-key work - making their hits, then fading into the night again. Now, the security forces were planning to go into Zambia in depth, in force and very much more overtly.
The ominous lull that followed the downing of the Viscount was about to end with the first major combined air and ground pre-emptive strike into Zambia.
The offensive was aimed at delivering a telling blow to the thousands of ZIPRA amassing across the northern border - and it promised to be the largest and the most ambitious mission of its kind to date.
By now, Joshua Nkomo had thousands of trained ZIPRA at various camps in Zambia and their presence and numbers were causing ComOps considerable concern.
By siting his camps deep inside Zambia, Nkomo was confident they were well out of the reach of the Rhodesians. His main camp was FC (Freedom Camp) at Westlands Farm, 15 kilometres (nine miles) north of Lusaka, and much too close to the capital for the Rhodesians to ever contemplate attacking. Or so he thought.
There were 4 000 ZIPRA undergoing training at FC which also doubled as ZIPRA’s main military high command - equivalent to army headquarters- where ZIPRA operations were planned and launched… and, as the most important terror camp in Zambia, it would be the first the Rhodesians would attack.
The plan was... after the fighter-bombers had pulverised the camp and delivered ZIPRA their first body blow, they would return to Rhodesia to rearm before heading out to Zambia again to bomb Mkushi camp, 125 kilometres (93 miles) to the northeast of Lusaka, where there were believed to be 1 000 enemy.
Although the detailed intelligence on Mkushi camp was very sketchy, the aerial photography was good and the Rhodesian eyes in the sky had picked up 500 uniformed ZIPRA on parade, and others were seen undergoing weapon training in the centre of the camp. The main base was surrounded by eight satellite camps.
After the initial air strikes on Mkushi, 120 SAS paratroopers and 45 SAS helicopter-borne troops including an 81 millimetre mortar team would carry out a vertical envelopment of the camp, then destroy it.
To round off the day’s massive pre-emptive activities, a Vampire, Lynx and four helicopter K-cars would attack ZIPRA’s CGT-2 (Communist Guerilla Training) camp, south-east of central Zambia and 100 kilometres (62 miles) east of Lusaka, and thought to house more than 4 000 enemy. After the strikes, RLI paratroopers and helicopter-borne troops would arrive to envelop the camp and complete the damage.
in view of the distances and logistics involved, an assembly area had to be set up at Kariba airfield... another at Mana Pools... and a third inside Zambia, five minutes helicopter flying time from Mkushi camp, where the helicopters could rearm and refuel.
The 120 SAS paratroopers were to fly direct from New Sarum to Mkushi, while the 45 helicopter-borne SAS men would take off from Mana Pools. For the attack on the CGT camp complex - the RLI paratroopers would jump off from Kariba, and the helicopter-borne RLI would leave from Mana Pools.
The personnel manning the Rhodesian-held assembly area inside enemy territory would parachute into Zambia at the same time the Air Force was making its initial strikes on Mkushi terror camp.
The force for the admin area was to be provided by the RLI under the command of their RSM The party had just completed their basic parachute course and carried out six jumps. After their final jump at New Sarum, they had climbed aboard trucks expecting to return to their barracks. Instead, they turned left into the SAS barracks and were placed under quarantine.
The next morning, they would carry out their seventh jump, not as expected on to New Sarum, however ... but a very long way outside their home country.
Every single SAS soldier in the regiment was called up and recalled to Salisbury for the mission. There were 270 including TA men. the most ever involved in a single operation. Those not directly involved in the raids, were to man the various admin areas.
Security was tight and the men were confined to camp. ComOps staff then travelled the 14 kilometres (nine miles) to the SAS’s new barracks near the airport called Kabrit - after the SAS pioneers’ first camp in the Western Desert - and presented their briefings to the squadron commanders, who, in turn, briefed their troops until every man was fully conversant with his role.
As the first chinks of dawn appeared in the greying sky on October 19, the SAS climbed into their trucks for the short drive to nearby New Sarum.
Before climbing into the command Dakota at the start of that day’s raid. General Walls suddenly spotted one rather elderly paratrooper with grey hair saddling up. He was Arnhem veteran, Sergeant Major Stan Standish, who had gone to England in the days of the Federation to find out about the SAS. Stan, now a TA soldier, had smelled something in the air, and, not wanting to miss out on the action, he had got himself attached for the week.
General Walls chatted to some of the SAS lads, then wandered over to Stan.
“Hell, I don’t know Stan,” the General said. “Is there anybody else here who could have been at Arnhem as well as you?”
“Only the bloody aircraft sir,” came the reply.
Later, the SAS squadron commanders climbed into the air force control tower to listen to the results of the air strikes on FC camp, on the outskirts of Lusaka.
The Rhodesians had no fight with the Zambians themselves, but they had no wish for the Zambian Air Force to interfere with the raid. The intelligence was that there were MiG 17 and 19 aircraft based at Mumbwa. Zambia’s main air force base 100 kilometres (62 miles) north of Lusaka. There was also the possibility of the Rapier missile system and Strelas being used against Rhodesian aircraft.
The Rhodesians had an extraordinary plan to neutralise such threats - one that was to earn a place in the history books.
Heading north and entering Zambian airspace at that time, were two Hunters, four Canberras and four K-car helicopter gunships. Other Hunters orbitted Lusaka airport and two more were en route for Mumbwa air base. to keep watch and retaliate in the event of Zambian Air Force reaction to the strike on FC camp.
At 08h30, high above the assembled target, the Hunters attacked, spewing death on the assembled Z1PRA below with their thousand pound bombs. Then came the Canberras and their cargoes of alpha bombs to compound the utter devastation on the parade square beneath.
The K-cars came next with their 20 millimetre cannons spitting high explosive shells into the scattering, totally stunned enemy.
The pilots reported that the ZIPRA anti-aircraft pits were unoccupied. Smallarms fire only had been directed at the planes but from two positions only. The element of surprise was complete.
Then came the extraordinary and now famous Rhodesian take-over of Zambian airspace. It was, as The Rhodesia Herald declared, a bizarre conversation.
Squadron Leader Chris Dixon, the Canberra commander, with the callsign Green Leader, called up Lusaka international airport, whose radar covered the whole of Zambia and was in direct contact with the Zambian Air Force at Mumbwa.
“Lusaka Tower, this is Green Leader,” he began.
Then Green Leader politely but firmly asked the air traffic controller to pass a message to the Zambian Air Force station commander at Mumbwa.
“We are attacking the terrorist base at Westlands Farm at this time. This attack is against Rhodesian dissidents and not against Zambia. Rhodesia has no quarrel repeat no quarrel - with Zambia or her security forces. We therefore ask you not to oppose or intervene in our attack.
“However, we are orbitting your airfield at this time and are under orders to shoot down any Zambian Air Force aircraft which does not comply with this request, and attempts to take off.”
Asked if be had copied the message, the controller replied in brisk, businesslike manner. “Copied.”
Soon afterwards, the controller came through asking if the Rhodesians had any objection to two civilian aircraft taking off.
Green Leader replied: “We have no objection there, but we advise you for the moment to stand by on that. We request that you hold on for a short while, half an hour or so.”
And for the next thirty minutes, the Rhodesian Air Force maintained control of Zambian airspace, while the Rhodesians continued to pound the ZIPRA camp to the north of the capital.
A huge pall of black smoke, clearly visible in Lusaka, hung over the destroyed FC camp. Men, wounded and dying, many carrying AK rifles, staggered out of the camp into the bush. Inside the camp, the number of dead ran into hundreds.
Dolphin I - the Rhodesian command Dakota bearing Air Force Group Captain Norman Walsb and General Walls - then took over the transmission from Green Leader, who peeled off out of range.
As The Blues were winding up their raid at FC, Dolphin 1 allowed a Kenyan aircraft from Nairobi to land at Lusaka airport. When the Kenyan pilot, who bad been asked to make an orbit of the airfield, thereby delaying his landing, asked who had priority, the air traffic controller replied:
“Well I think the Rhodesians do at this time.”
Then General Walls introduced himself as the Rhodesian Sunray (commander) and told the controller to tell the Zambian Government to “wind its neck in.”
General Walls asked to speak to someone in the Government and even though the controller obligingly made a telephone call, the Zambian at the other end of the line declined to speak to him.
“Okay, you can carry on now,” Norman Walsh instructed the controller, signing off the transmission.

In Salisbury, the SAS squadron commanders, listening to Green Leader and the strikes on FC climbed down from the New Sarum control tower and quickly passed the news of the successful air attacks on to their troops. Then they filed into the six Dakotas and took up their seats in readiness for the attack on Mkushi camp.
Once over the lake dividing the two countries, the pilots flew low level at treetop height and under radar cover. Soon the bumpy ride began to take its toll and many paratroopers swiftly filled their air sickness bags.
The attack on Mkushi had started badly with only one pair of Canberras dropping their weapons on the targeL But the Hunter strikes were good. and at 11h45 the Dakotas bearing the SAS turned into Mkushi on their approach run.
The paratroopers could see the Hunter strikes ... the craters ... the columns of smoke and dust and the fires as the bombs did their damage.
For the occupants below, all hell was breaking loose.
By now, the first men due to go out of the Dakotas were standing by the door, one hand on their containers, the other on the static lines, moments from dropping into the ZIPRA camp.
In another Dakota, Sergeant Major Stan Standish stood ready and waiting to drop into the forward admin base, a few minutes flying time from the main camp. Stan was in SAS colours and on his chest was an impressive row of 11 campaign medal ribbons. As the oldest paratrooper in the Rhodesian Army jumped out, the young men following behind, couldn’t help but feel a sense of occasion.
Within moments of landing, the admin base party had climbed out of their harnesses and were getting down to business. The first airdrop of helicopter fuel was expected any minute to allow refuelling and there was no one so nervous as a chopper pilot out of fuel deep inside hostile territory. If the admin party did not have the fuel ready for them, the conversation tended to be unprintable.
Stan Standish was to be seen everywhere on the DZ that day, rolling drums, collecting chutes and exhorting the RLI troops to greater efforts. When the RLI RSM learned how old Stan was, he shook his head and promptly lashed into his men with words of: “If a 60-year-old SAS man can roll drums, you can roll ‘em a damn sight faster.”
The SAS paratroopers meanwhile had been dropped off around Mkushi. Three of the six sticks had been dropped I 500 metres from their target while other paratroopers were put down a bit too close for their liking.
They were having contacts with fleeing enemy before they could get into a semblance of a sweepline. Then a heavy grassfire, started from all the shooting and the wind, began blowing it straight towards the SAS. The stop group commanders cleared their men away from the blaze, and the fire swept on destroying many parachutes.
Next came the 45 helicopter-borne SAS, including an 81 millimetre mortar team. But commander, Captain Bob McKenna and his team in one of the helicopter stop groups was put down eight kilometres (five miles) from their target and faced a frustrating time waiting for the helicopters to return from refuelling to reposition them.
Then SAS lance corporal Jeff Collett in another group was fatally wounded. The khaki-clad ZIPRA responsible was swiftly made to account for those fatal shots, and, as the soldiers glanced at the form of the dead enemy, they realised it was a woman.
As their briefings had not mentioned anything about women ZIPRA, the troops were slightly taken aback. Indeed, as the planning had been based mostly on aerial photography, no one could tell them that.
It took a bit longer for the other stop groups to realise that they were attacking a predominantly women’s camp. For they were all in camouflage shirts, trousers, black boots and webbing and many carried rifles just as their male comrades did.
Bob McKenna and his group, having finally been put in the right place, were sweeping towards the main camp.
Suddenly, a male, obviously an instructor to all the women running around, opened up on them, - and Bruce Langley went down, part of his face blown away and a wound in his shoulder.
SAS doctor, Jon Thomson hurried across and began putting a drip in his semiconscious patient. Then a grass fire swept towards the little party bustling around Bruce and they lifted him on to a pole stretcher. But Bruce, no lightweight at 99 kilograms (220 lbs), broke the stretcher. He was picked up bodily and rushed through the fire to safety.
The instructor responsible for Bruce’s injury realised that his cover was disappearing rapidly and began shooting at them again. As the SAS shot back and silenced him once and for all, the doctor, oblivious to all but his patient, finished putting up the drip.
Hardly a minute was passing without an action of some sort happening in the camp. There were hundreds of individual foxholes all over the camp and the K-cars with their 20 millimetre cannons were clearing them before the ground troops followed up.
Most of the enemy, although armed, seemed more intent on surviving than putting up a fight They were hiding in the foxholes... behind rocks... in crevices... behind trees ... in bushes ... in the river ... in buildings ...
Those who did fight back were very aggressive, far more so than the women at Chimoio. There was no question in anyone’s mind that they knew how to use their rifles.
Mac McIntosh and his little party commandeered a Russian built and supplied Zil truck, and used it to lay four landmines in the access road to delay any enemy reaction group. Afterwards, they drove around the camp collecting all the arras and ammunition they could from inside the foxholes and depositing them in the centre of the camp.
In the heart of Mkushi, the SAS found huge parade grounds and a library daubed with a Russian hammer and sickle. There was an enormous kitchen with a massive cauldron, a training ground, an underground armoury and a bunker which the women were forced to dig when on punishment and used by camp Chief-of-Staff Moses Pinda as his headquarters.
The camp was beautifully laid out and was far more military orientated and had more amenities than any of the ZANLA camps the SAS had seen in all their years in Mozambique. Valuable documents, including signals equipment and ciphers, were recovered by the SB boys, and Scotty McCormack captured a Russian general’s uniform complete with medal.
Then a Zambian Air Force MiG flew over the admin base and Mkushi main camp, sending the Rhodesians below scattering for cover. But it harboured no aggressive intentions and tended to hide away behind puffs of cloud and smoke. Just to make sure it didn’t get involved, the Rhodesian Hunters were prowling about keeping an eye on it
Behind the scenes, the Zambian authorities were in a state of intense panic. Intercepts told that the Zambian Air Force was far too scared to retaliate.
The Rhodesians’ cross-border activities that day so unnerved six Zambian police officers at one nearby station that they ran away and were never seen again.
Meanwhile, a signal from the army base at nearby Kabwe was describing the situation as “very critical”. Another said: “The person who was in charge of the radar at the time of the bombing(on FC camp) and the commander of ZNDF, Lt-Gen. Pete Zuze must be sacked because they are useless. If they are not sacked, Zambia will experience more bombings.”

By now, the air force and the RLI had attacked CGT-2 terror base, but word of the earlier attacks had spread and the birds had flown. There was therefore only token resistance, but at the end of the raid, 51 enemy lay dead at CGT-2.
By 16h00, Mkushi was more or less secured and, on the SAS’s suggestion, a decision was made to bring in the Vultures - the security forces name for the press, as they turned up when everybody was dead. Despite reports to the contrary, the Rhodesians were not about to deny that there were women at the camp, or conceal the hundreds of communist weapons, Chinese literature, military training manuals and instructional notes that proved it had indeed been a ZIPRA training centre and not. as Joshua Nkomo would allege, a place of shelter for students and sick people.
At ten that night, the wounded were still being ferried from FC camp to the University Teaching Hospital in Lusaka. Private vehicles belonging to the South African ANC and SWAPO, the Red Cross and police had been used throughout the day, and ZIPRA had asked the OAU Liberation Committee for 15 lorries to ferry the wounded.
Many of the wounded had fled into the bush and could not be picked up. Others, beyond hope, were left where they were to die in the bombed-out camp. One commander, realising it was all over, turned his gun on himself.
Meanwhile, the Zambian Government had gone into an emergency session to discuss the devastating raids.
And in Mkushi, the SAS settled down for the night, ambushing known paths and tracks and shooting a couple of enemy vehicles that tried to get close under cover of darkness.

Next day, the Vultures arrived on the dusty parade square of Mkushi. It was 24 hours after the attack had gone in; the SAS were still mopping up and the air was full of kites wheeling high over the bodies.
A women prisoner, Phinah Malaba, dressed in khaki slacks and jacket, was brought forward to speak to the journalists. Phinah was one of seven prisoners taken back to Rhodesia. Phinah had been a training instructor and all the 13 male instructors at Mkushi had been trained in Angola.
There had been two separate groups in the camp - one for 1 000 trained enemy and the other for 1 000 new arrivals, who were still undergoing their training. The overall strength of Mkushi totalled 2 036.
The 1 000 trained women had spent six months learning bayonet charging combat tactics, logistics, foot and rifle drill, camouflage and concealment in the bush, weapon handling and firing a variety of rifles and rocket launchers, ambushing and skirmishing guerilla warfare administration and urban warfare.
Joshua Nkomo had gathered so many women to his cause over the years that the time had come to do something with them. Sadly for them, and acting very much against the Russians advice, Nkomo opted to give them military training. They were thus trained military personnel and as far as the Rhodesians were concerned, another enemy.
Even though their role was eventually to be staffing forward bases, it was felt that had they ever found their way into Rhodesia, they would have had a serious impact on the country. And not having had any prior knowledge of them, the security forces would have had no counter to them.
While the Press took their pictures, the troops set about burning everything they thought ZIPRA could use again. More than 1 000 weapons went up in smoke, and the Russian Zil truck was destroyed.

Next morning, the SAS prepared to pull out of the still-smouldering camp and moved to the north-east to await the choppers, After half the party was choppered out, the very excited voice of one of the sentries suddenly came up on the ground commander’s radio to warn of a large party of men approaching the camp in sweeping formation.
The group included 64 Zambian Army, 17 policemen and several ZIPRA. dressed in an assortment of uniforms and carrying a variety of weapons.
The Rhodesians allowed them to get close - then opened up with devastating results. Clive Cripps initiated the ambush and the ensuing contact lasted .twenty minutes. By the end of it, 47 enemy lay dead and two men were taken prisoner.
One capture was a Zambian Army corporal and the other the ZIPRA logistics officer at Mkushi, Mountain Gutu, who turned out to be one of the most important prisoners the intelligence people had had to date.
He had been to Russia on a commander’s course, knew all the ZIPRA hierarchy and was able to give SB a valuable insight into the top ZIPRA men, which, until then, they didn’t have. As the logistics officer, he had travelled around Zambia delivering supplies and was able to pinpoint the many ZIPRA camps beginning to spring up throughout Zambia and the routes used to get there.
Within days of Gutu’s capture, the bombers were on their way to Zambia to destroy a logistics base near Lusaka. He also told how ZIPRA were holding dissidents and captured black members of the security forces in an underground prison 140 kilometres (87 miles) into Zambia. The Selous Scouts subsequently rescued 32 Africans, including security force members and civilians abducted for terror training.
The captured Zambian corporal was ultimately returned to Zambia and Mountain Guru became the chief firearms instructor for the Muzorewa youth wing, undergoing training at a secret farm in Bulawayo.
Operation Gatling had been the most devastating operation yet mounted in Zambia. The death toll was high: between 800 and I 000 were killed at FC camp, and another 600 wounded, The Mkushi figure was put at about 600 dead, and at CTG-2, fifty.
The offensive sent Zambians into a state of panic and for weeks afterwards, ZIPRA shot at every low-flying aircraft approaching Lusaka airport. Several domestic flights were struck by smallarms fire as they came in to land and several months later they succeeded in shooting down two Zambian army jets.
The Zambians began harassing whites and saw spies behind every tree. ZIPRA were convinced that the success of the raids had been due to intelligence received from white Zambians. Some people were beaten, others murdered. And everyone wondered when the Rhodesians would strike again.
The Zambian offensive had coincided with other self-defence attacks against ZANLA bases in the Chimoio circle, both described by General Walls as “enormously successful.” He said he “did not give a damn what the rest of the world said about Rhodesia’s raids into neighbouring territories.
“If we worried about what the West says we should do, we would have had our necks wrung a long time ago. It seems to me that we are constantly being advised to lie down and take it. But nobody else in the rest of the world has to do it - only us.”
