Until now, strategic targets in urban enemy areas had been out of bounds to SAS ground troops, or any other special forces for that matter.
But it was now May, 1978, and the war had been raging in earnest for some five and a half years, and when a high-ranking ZANLA capture pinpointed a prize of a target close to a major Mozambican town, ComOps began to give it serious attention.
The talkative capture, in on many ZANLA secrets, had provided the Rhodesian war effort with detailed information on a number of major targets, helping to piece together vital bits in the intelligence jigsaw. One item of particular interest was an entire ZANLA barracks, occupied by 100 enemy at a time - and all destined for Rhodesia.
The building - known as Battariao Barracks - also housed the provincial headquarters of ZANU, the political wing, and in addition to the 100 transitory terrorists, there were resident ZANU general staff mechanics, drivers and assistants. There were four long barrack blocks interlinked by an ablution complex, a filling station, a separate logistics stores and a spares room.
While it was an ideal target for security force attack, there were certain difliculties.
Battariao Barracks was on the edge era major heavily populated town of Tete, the main centre and hub of Tete Province, where there were more than one thousand FRELIMO soldiers in residence.
Just to make life interesting for any would-be attacker, the main FRELIMO barracks was near ZANLA’s Battariao Barracks, there was another FRELIMO building right next door, and a guard outpost on the other side of the river.
The captured terrorist had forewarned the Rhodesians too that there were three unarmed sentries on duty on the main gate of Battariao Barracks, who if challenged, would ask for a simple password. It was nice to know of course... . but the Rhodesians had no intention of walking in through the front gate.
Tete town was 100 kiiometres (62 miles) as the crow flies from the border and to infiltrate fight up to the doorstep of the major FRELIMO stronghold would be an ambitious, high-risk operation. Entry was going to be a major problem.
How could they get to the target undetected? And how could they get safely away again before FRELIMO and ZANLA or both had time to react?
It was impossible to walk operators in to the target. It was just too far. Parachuting anywhere near to the barracks would be a risky business, too.
They could be choppered in, but would have to be taken so far away from the target that,they would need vehicles to get in close. And with all those methods of entry, they ran the very real risk of bumping into FRELIMO or ZANLA before reaching the target.
What they needed was a totally clandestine method of entry and exit. The mission was offered to the SAS and it was obvious to Captain Dave Dodson that the solution lay in the actual position of the barracks themselves.
The building was on the north-western tip of Tete, right on the banks of the Zambezi River - a sitting duck for a water-borne assault.
By canoeing downriver, the saboteurs could get access to the barracks, lay their explosive charges around the building under cover of darkness and be back on the river and away again before the big bang went up and the alarm was raised.
Like the operations on Cabora Bassa pioneered by the SAS the previous year, it meant that they could loom out of the darkness, attack their target and melt into the night before the enemy knew what had hit them.
The beauty of the plan, too, was that the element of surprise would be total.
ZANLA were extremely confident that they were safe from Rhodesian security force attack. They felt that as they were so close to such a major heavily populated town with a very strong FRELIMO presence, the Rhodesians would never dare attack them.
In the unlikely event of them thinking seriously about it after that, they would naturally expect them to infiltrate overland after being airlifted into Mozambique. They would never expect them to infiltrate down the river - an arduous, time-consuming and circuitous route.
So confident were they, the barracks was only fenced on three of its four sides - and the unprotected side was the one facing on to the river.
After laying their charges around the barracks, the raiders would have to travel past Tete town ... under the giant Tete bridge spanning the Zambezi - and past FRELIMO’s main barracks. There were armed militia guarding the bridge too but they were there to protect it from attack from both sides. They were hardly likely to expect trouble from the river itself.
It would be a daring, difficult operation. And it would be something completely different from anything the security forces had done before. Yet SAS officer Dave Dodson was confident that. given the chance, it was well within SAS capabilities.
Fortunately, ComOps shared his view and the plan was finally given the green light. Dodson, who was to lead the mission, chose seven other operators to go with him, and preparations and rehearsals got underway immediately.
It was going to take 250 kilograms of explosives to destroy the barracks, and it took a team of outside demolition experts, specially called in for the mission, three full days of intense activity to prepare the 12 Rhodesian-manufactured Wrecker charges.
They were planning on using a minimum time delay of ninety minutes to give them sufficient time to get clear of the barracks before the explosives ripped the buildings apart, and the trials proved more or less accurate within five minutes.
They were to use a number of different types of timing devices so that if one device failed to go off, there were several back-up mechanisms. Having gone so far and taken so many risks, they were not intending to take any chances of equipment failure. At last, all the preparations and rehearsals were over and everyone was ready to go.
The eight operators deployed to the Selous Scouts fort at Mtoko, in north-east Rhodesia to prepare for the mission, and on May 30, they boarded the choppers for the first and easiest part of the operation. They were soon in enemy territory, flying over the endless mopani forests and scrub to a spot some 75 kilometres (46 miles) upriver of Tete.
It was still daylight as the choppers began their descent to the treetops and the eight SAS men could see that the Zambezi was in full flood - and knew immediately that they were in for a very interesting journey.
Quickly, they jumped from the choppers and yanked out their explosives, weapons and canoe bags. The choppers lifted, then were gone...
All fell silent again. There was not a soul around to see them as they busied themselves assembling the four canoes. There were the usual scatterings of kraals dotted around the riverbank, but the sudden chatter of helicopters had sent the locals scurrying for cover, just as it always did.
Meanwhile, Sergeant Major Pete Allan and his mortar team were also on their way to Tete Province with their mortar bombs slung in special bags under the helicopters. Their role was to create a diversion near the ZANLA terrorist staging post at Chinhanda Crossroads and take the attention away from Dodson and his helicopters. They hoped that by harassing Chinhanda Crossroads, the enemy would think they were being attacked and react by concentrating their troops there, thus taking them away from Tete where the real threat lay.
Back at the river, the eight SAS operators, blackened-up and clad in FRELIMO uniforms, were getting on with their preparations.
There were to be two men - and big ones at that - to each of the four canoes and it was obvious that with their heavy charges and accessories, an RPD light machinegun to each canoe, together with their personal weapons, it was going to be a very tight squeeze.
It was clear too that the weight of the charges combined with the current would make it impossible for them to travel independently without getting into serious difficulty.
As soon as night began to fail, they pushed the canoes into the water and lined up side-by-side, holding on to the canoe next to them for a raft effect, thereby providing greater stability.
Once everyone got the feel of the fast-flowing current, Dodson gave the word and they set sail for Tete, using the rudders, and with the men on each side of the “raft” paddling. But the current was so fast and they were hastened along so quickly that there was very little paddling done that night… and they swiftly bumped and crashed on their way to Tete under the cover of darkness. So weighed down by explosives were they, that they were riding just above the waterline.
Then they heard the unmistakable rush of rapids and waterfalls across the night. But apart from one hair-raising moment when the current snatched at their raft and swung them around in a circle, they managed to manoeuvre around the rapids without difficulty.
Around 03h00, the distinctive muffled grunts of hippos could be heard through the darkness as they grazed along the riverbanks and splashed in the shallows.
As the new day began to dawn and the chance of compromise became greater, they looked for somewhere to base up for the rest of the day before continuing their travels again that night. They had done well and had covered about 45 kilometres (28 miles). Only thirty kilometres (19 miles) to go.
They beached at a little tributary and began laboriously humping their extremely heavy, tightly-packed canoes as far away from the fiver as possible. It was a thickly bushed area and they had specially chosen it to screen them from view. Unfortunately, they found that a well-used footpath crossed the tributary and although they based up well away from the path, they were seen at midday by a group of young Africans.
A quick burst on a silenced Czechoslovakian-manufactured Skorpian submachinegun sent them on their way, but the SAS were concerned that the youngsters would report them to FRELIMO... and immediately began to take precautions in case a strong heavily armed group came to hunt them down.
They planned to leave the canoes and explosives behind: walk out of the area and be recovered later by chopper. But they had no intention of letting FRELIMO get their hands on their explosives or twenty thousand Rhodesian dollars worth of precious canoes, and rigged them up for demolition.
Then, with the early-warning groups on the look-out for trouble, they laid low in the thick bush and waited for the FRELIMO troops, who must surely come. But amazingly, none did.
The operation was still on and they dismantled their demolition kit on the canoes, and that night were back on the river again. The current was much the same as the previous night and they were buffeted further along into enemy waters without much paddling.
Everything was going according to plan and they were well within their timeframe. There was going to be plenty of time to get to Tete, do the job and get away under cover of darkness.
As they crashed on their way through the black of the night, each man was apprehensive, yet quietly confident that the job was all but in the bag.
Then, way off in the distance they saw the faint glow of lights and knew they were getting close to their target It looked just like normal lighting and would not be a problem.
But then it happened. As they swung around the corner, the black security of the night and their confidence suddenly disappeared as they found themselves under the merciless glare of high-powered searchlights beaming out across the river from a nearby power station.
The Salisbury saboteurs and their deadly cargo of explosives were centre stage, a few hundered metres from the ZANLA barracks and from the nearby FREL1MO barracks - and beautifully illuminated for all to see. Never had they felt so vulnerable.
Quickly, the canoeists on either side of the raft paddled furiously away eagerly seeking the safety of the shadows once more, while every other finger was on the trigger.
They were fully expecting to be challenged or shot at any second, but miraculously, nothing came of it and they continued on their way unseen and unopposed, hardly daring to believe their good fortune.
Four hundred metres further on they pulled into the bank and rafted-up in a clump of partially submerged trees. It was already 22h00 and they had an hour to kill before moving down to the ZANLA barracks.
They were now on the outskirts of Tete and only 500 metres from the target. The barracks, a mere 100 metres from the riverbank, was completely lit up and a bit further downstream, the twinkle of lights could be seen in Tete town, which lay calm and quiet - and unsuspecting.
Eventually, it was time to get going and they unloaded their explosives. Leaving two men behind to watch over their canoes, the others carefully moved towards the target, ZANLA’s Battariao Barracks.
A close-in reconnaissance was carried out to see exactly where the sentries were positioned and where the charges were to be placed to the best effect.
The explosives meanwhile had been dropped off at a central point and were to be carried to the outer walls as they were needed. As the demolition team set about laying the charges, commander Dave Dodson and the others kept a look-out for intruders.
Suddenly, the commander bumped the button on his high-powered strobe light in his webbing pouch - carried to attract aircraft and for emergency rescue signals - and although dulled by the webbing, it flashed on and off… on and off, across the night.
Everyone held his breath again waiting for some sort of reaction. The strobe continued to flash out its urgent signal for forty worrying seconds before it could be stopped.
But once again, nothing happened and no one came to investigate. They offered up a silent prayer, grateful that good fortune was with them that night.
Quickly, quietly, the demolition teams got on with their task, returning every so often to the central point to get more explosives. As Dave Berry hugged the shadows and helped lay the charges, he could hear the unmistakable sound of someone snoring inside the ZANLA barracks.
Then a man wandered out of the barrack block to relieve himself close to the building, too lazy to walk across to the ablution block.
The soldiers froze and kept to the shadows as he went about his business. But the man didn’t see them and when his toiletry was complete, he sauntered back into the barracks, oblivious to the activities out in the darkness.
Soon everything had been done and it was time to go. The Wreckers were all propped up around the building, the ringmain linking them had been run out. and the various time delays attached.
As stealthily as they had arrived, so they retraced their steps and left the barracks.
They climbed into their canoes and pushed off, riding much higher in the water now that they no longer had their cargo of explosives.
There was no need to raft-up any more and the eight canoeists moved out into

midstream and headed off into the night, the current carrying them swiftly away from the impending trouble.
Dave Berry and Sergeant Small Bez were ahead and nearing the huge Tete bridge spanning the Zambezi; some of the others were abreast of the barracks and the commander and his partner had just left the bank and were fifty metres from the target.
It was 15 minutes since they had activated the time delays and there was still another 75 minutes to go before their charges went off. But by then, they would be well away and en route to their LZ twenty kilometres (12 miles) downstream.
Suddenly, unexpectedly, a tremendous thunderclap tore into the night behind them as almost a quarter of a ton of plastic explosive sent the ZANLA barracks sky high. Flames licked the building and a pall of smoke hung in the air.
Startled though the eight canoeists were, there was no time to analyse what had gone wrong with the time delays.
Everyone began paddling as fast as he could, each man feeling very vulnerable and just a little nervous. By now the sky had a reddish hue to it and men could be seen running around Tete Bridge ahead of them.
As the front canoeists, Dave Berry and Small Bez went under the bridge, they saw a FRELIMO Land-Rover shoot across the bridge, stop at a control point, continue on to the other side; do a U-turn, then roar back again. There was a fair old panic going on and there were some angry people charging around.
Dave and Small Bez stopped paddling and got their weapons ready. But they were unable to stop their canoe and the current continued to carry them downstream.
Luckily, when they emerged from the other side of the bridge, they did so unnoticed and continued on their way passing the main FRELIMO barracks uneventfully.
The others meanwhile, were still paddling downstream, hoping against hope to get past the main FRELIMO barracks and the bridge unnoticed.
But despite much coming and going on the bridge, no one seemed to notice the canoeists far below them - and they too continued their journey without incident.
As the commander paddled under the giant bridge, if flashed through his mind what a wonderful target it would make one day.
An hour later, they all met up on a little island in the Zambezi, exchanged a few hasty words of greeting and then set out on the final leg of the mission.
Twenty kilometres from the target they beached and disassembled the canoes. The commander sent the “mission accomplished” message to Mtoko with the request to recover them ... and a couple of hours after first light, the choppers arrived. FRELIMO fired at them as they lifted off for home, but it was token show only and their shots were too wild to do any damage.
Back at the Selous Scouts fort, they celebrated their success with welcoming crates of beer that the Scouts had waiting. After two nights without sleep, they were all thoroughly exhausted. But the adrenalin was high, for it had been something different and one of the most exhilarating tasks of the war.
There were certainly nothing like 100 ZANLA sleeping in the barracks that night, but some men were killed. Aerial photographic interpretation revealed that the barracks had been extensively damaged in the blast and it would be a long time before ZANLA would be able to make use of the building
Sergeant Major Pete Allah’s diversionary mortar tactics were successful, too, and the radio interceptors confirmed that the enemy had been convinced that Chinhanda Crossroads was under attack.
The operation had marked a turning point in Rhodesian SAS history, clearing the way for more daring operations against strategic targets in urban enemy areas. And it had been a walk-over, just as the commander had suspected it would be.
As for ZANLA. they were never able to work out how the SAS got to the target - and from then until the last days of the war, they could never be certain when or where the SAS would strike again.