In northern Rhodesia, another Fireforce action was underway. 
Fireforce was the unique and lethal blend of air and ground units used with maximum skill, inflicting enormous casualties on terrorist groups. Such was the cutting edge of the concept that the kill ratio was to reach a remarkable sixty to one. 
Once terrorists had been located by observation groups, a fireforce reaction group - manned by the RLI, RAR or both - was called in from a strategic area and the enemy were then subjected to a vertical envelopment by helicopter-borne combat troops. Later in the war, paratroops were also used. 
The reaction troops were dropped off on likely escape routes, and while the troop carrying Alouette helicopters - fitted with twin MAGs of Belgian design - withdrew to safety, the Rhodesians would fight it out with the terrorists on the ground. Overall control was from the Alouette command ship, the K-Car (Kill Car), which had a twenty millimetre cannon mounted. 
The security force sweep lines would then drive the enemy into the path of prepositioned stop groups. Faced with the fireforce, the enemy had three options - to stand and fight and be annihilated ... scatter to a pre-determined rendezvous point ... or bombshell - to break in all directions. 
The ground commandos relied on bush skills to locate and kill, and murderous engagements occurred at close range in the form of personal duels. 
Positioning the ground troops was once described as a lethal chess game ... and to outsmart the enemy, fake insertions were made, with a helicopter hovering at treetop height to give the impression that troops were de-planing. The insurgents would then take another escape route - the one that the airborne commander had planned they would take. And they would run straight into the path of cut-off troops waiting in readiness for the kill. 
Yet the Rhodesians didn’t always get things their own way. The wild countryside dotted with huge kopjes, the thick bush, long elephant grass and endless msasa trees were an enemy, too, providing ideal cover and at times giving the terrorists the edge in the hide-and-seek game of life and death. It all went to make the task of ground troops trying to hunt and flush them out, fraught with unseen dangers. 
The fireforce action on July 19. 1975, was one such occasion. 
Part of the action took place in a dry riverbed which wound through a thickly bushed and very rocky area. There were huge boulders dotted all over the riverbed, interspersed with clusters of small rocks. Erosion had taken place, and here and there were washout underhangings along the banks. 
It was from one of these washouts that a gang of ZAN LA watched as two Rhodesians silently made their way down the riverbed looking for signs of the enemy. 
The ZANLA men could not have got themselves into a better position. The washout fanned a cave-like hideaway, and a curtain of enormous tree roots draped the entrance, concealing them from view. Their little cave was just one metre up from the riverbed and they had the advantage of not only remaining undetected, but of having a grandstand view of the two unsuspecting trackers moving down the riverbed beneath them. 
Then, when the two soldiers were just ten metres away. ZANLA opened fire and the Rhodesians fell. 
For their RLI colleagues looking down on the scene from a three-metre high embankment, it was extremely difficult to see where the two men were. And, because of the boulders allover the riverbed, it was hard to tell if the men were injured ... or dead ... or merely taking cover behind the boulders.
It was also hard to work out precisely where the terrorists had fired from - or, where they had moved to - if they had moved at all. A K-Car tried to winkle them out of the area, but because of the difficult terrain, it proved a futile exercise. 
After failing to draw ZANLA’s fire, the general feeling was that ZANLA had moved from wherever they had been hiding, to a spot further down the riverbed.
Then the sounds of moaning floated up from the riverbed. Former SAS soldier Corporal John Coey, an American and the callsign’s medic, leapt from the embankment to help his wounded colleagues - and as he did so, more shots cracked out and he fell into the riverbed. For the ZANLA gang had not been down the riverbed as imagined, but directly beneath him. 
By now, RLI officer Joey du Plooy had arrived on the scene and began organising RLI and RAR stop groups around the area. Then he attempted to sort ZANLA out himself by shooting and throwing grenades into the riverbed. 
But because the enemy’s little cave was off the riverbed, the grenades were having virtually no effect They were merely bursting into the riverbed, with the fragments spreading in every direction - while ZANLA, holed up in their cave, remained unharmed. 
And because the RLI officer was not too sure if the three soldiers down in the riverbed were dead or alive, he was unable to do precisely what he wanted to do anyway. 
Joey du Plooy and his men then began to skirmish forward to get into a better position. But once again, ZANLA opened up ... and one Rhodesian soldier was shot and killed. 
Joey du Plooy received a graze in the head, in the incident and another man was wounded in the leg. The casualties were mounting - and still the men responsible had not been located and accounted for. 
Much to his dismay, the RLI officer was ordered to get into a chopper and return to base. It was with great reluctance that he obeyed the command, for he was eager to get to grips with the men responsible for their troubles that day. 
As a casevac chopper climbed out of the LZ and turned for base, Joey du Plooy left behind a number of stop groups positioned around the area ... and three colleagues down at the bottom of the riverbed, whose fate was still very much unknown. 
The RLI continued firing into the area of the enemy position. Occasionally, they got return fire and sometimes they were greeted only with silence, until eventually no one was quite sure if the ZANLA gang was still there or not 
One long hour followed another and the problem remained unresolved. Eventually the SAS, based at Mount Darwin at the time, were told of the situation and warned that they might be called in to help.
But as the day wore on and no further word was received, it seemed as if the panic was all over.
But as dusk descended at the dry riverbed in northern Rhodesia, the problem had still not been sorted out. The three men lay somewhere in the riverbed - and no one had been able to work out if they were dead or alive. 
It was time to call in the SAS. 
Lieutenant Bob McKenna, rounded up volunteers and told them what sketchy information he had. Within minutes, Bob and his team of Horse Green, Torti King, Sergeant Flash Smythe, Alan Hider and medic Wolfgang Hucke, were airborne. 
It was dark when the two chopper pilots flew out from Mount Darwin and set course for the troublespot north-east of Rushinga. Unusual as it was for helicopters to fly so late at night, the pilots were undeterred by the hazards involved ... without night-flying equipment and the ability to see the horizon, they might end upside down with fatal consequences. 
But Rhodesia’s plucky pilots were prepared to take their life in their hands when circumstances called for it; and this was definitely one such time. 
Luckily for them and their passengers. there was virtually a full moon that night, and while the conditions were not ideal, it was not quite so dangerous. 
It was a cold, crystal-clear night and Bob McKenna was wearing a much-prized British Army smock, designed for climates similar to the one the Rhodesians were experiencing that crisp winter’s night 
The brilliant glare from the moon shone on the helicopters as they flew through the still, silent night probing the darkness. The choppers’ red and green navigational lights flashed through the black of the night while inside the Alouettes a faint light came from the pilots’ shielded instrument panel. 
An hour after take off, the pilots turned off their navigational lights as they began their approach to the embankment above the dry riverbed. For they had no wish to attract attention to themselves, their passengers or the other troops in the area. 
As the choppers came in to land 100 metres from the embankment, a young RLI corporal, Butch Alexander, who had taken over control and had been running things since Joey du Plooy had been casevacked out, sprinted across to greet them. 
He reported that the situation was much as it had been for some time. No one could tell if the enemy were still in the riverbed, although the general feeling was that they had gone. No one had been able to pinpoint the position of the bodies - or had been able to establish if they were bodies and not wounded men. 
Positioning two of the SAS team - both with night sights on their rifles - to give covering fire, Bob McKenna and the RLI corporal crawled to the edge of the embankment overlooking the riverbed to carry out a reconnaissance. They stopped only to chat to a couple of RLI men who had been left on guard and were told that there had been no movement or moaning coming from below for several hours. 
The SAS officer inched forward and peered over the edge. The figures of the three injured men were sprawled beneath him in the riverbed, well illuminated in the moonlight Bob McKenna watched for a few moments, but saw no movement. It seemed obvious to him that the three men were dead. 
But where were the enemy? 
To pinpoint their position, he got the RLI guards to throw grenades, including phosphorus, into the riverbed Although there was no reaction, Bob realised the enemy might not have left. Perhaps they were just lying low? Perhaps they were trying to conserve their ammunition until the time the rest of the Rhodesians ventured into the riverbed? 
For fifteen minutes, the SAS team fired rounds into likely hiding positions. But they were unable to provoke any return fire at all. 
Although ZANLA’s hideout had still not been pinpointed, Bob eventually decided there was nothing for it but to go down into the riverbed and find out exactly what the situation was. He certainly had no intention of jumping over the edge to get riddled with bullets as fellow American John Coey had. And if something wasn’t done soon, they would be there all night.
Bob repositioned some of the SAS team to cover any likely escape routes and provide cover, then asked Horse Green to go along with him into the riverbed. 
When the RLI corporal Butch Alexander heard what they were planning. he insisted on going with them. The corporal pointed out that the three men down in the riverbed were his buddies and it was only right he should go along. 
Bob McKenna agreed, then prepared himself for a fight. Shedding his webbing and leaving his rifle behind, he armed himself with his pistol and stuffed the large pockets of his British Army smock with hand grenades. 
Then Bob, Horse Green and Butch Alexander went 150 metres downriver to where they felt they could safely enter the riverbed. 
The bright moon was creating a mass of eerie shadows in the dry riverbed that night, as Bob, pistol in one hand, grenade in the other, started to slink up the riverbed snake-fashion leading the way through the mounds of boulders. 
Crawling twenty metres behind him came Butch Alexander - and bringing up the rear was Horse Green who had been given the MAG machinegun together With instructions to blast away the moment he heard or saw anything untoward 
All was silent as they slithered around the rocks, snaking ever-closer to the suspected ZANLA position.
Suddenly, Horse Green heard something and without so much as a word of warning, fired off several long bursts from his machinegun. Every fifth round was a red tracer and they were ripping in sheets over the heads of his two companions, Horse let loose 100 or so rounds … and his two companions, although startled. continued crawling through the night. without a word spoken.
Then, just as unexpectedly as it had started, so it ended and all fell silent again. There was just the moon, the boulders, the long shadows and the eeriness…
Eventually, Bob McKenna arrived at a spot where he could see the three soldiers. They were lying within arm’s length of one another and now, there could be no doubt as to their fate. They were all dead. 
As the SAS officer and his two companions crawled closer, they could see white phosphorus glowing through the thick curtain of tree roots as it clung to the walls of ZANLA’s little cave-like hideaway. At long last, the enemy’s position had been pinpointed.
The three soldiers lay in the riverbed just ten metres from the cave. listening for the sound of breathing or coughing that would tell if ZANLA were still holed up inside. But, there wasn’t a murmur and Bob McKenna reasoned that after all this time the enemy must have fled. 
He lobbed a couple of grenades into the still glowing cave and as the last one went off he summoned up all his courage and, with his pistol in his hand, he leapt up into the hideout - while below. Horse Green and Butch Alexander prepared to give covering fire. 
But there was no reaction. Behind the screen of tree roots there was only an empty cave. The enemy had gone, escaping through a gap in the stop lines, pausing only long enough to take their victims’ machinegun and ammunition.
An SAS tracker team followed up next morning, but the enemy had made their escape across a maize field, which was criss-crossed with the tracks of the local population, thereby making identification of the ZANLA Spoor impossible. The search was abandoned and the only thing they found was the captured machinegun ZANLA had dropped when it became too heavy for them. 
The SAS had been very impressed with the young RLI corporal who had taken charge and run things before their arrival. Butch Alexander had done an excellent job in very confusing, difficult, and at times, extremely demoralising circumstances.
They tried to get him to join the SAS, but although keen, the corporal was always busy with fireforce actions and never found the time to apply. 
With four good men cut down and two others wounded, July 19 was to go down as a dark day in the history of the RLI. 
As for the SAS rescuers and the RLI corporal who had volunteered to crawl up the riverbed and face the unknown with them. it had been one of the most harrowing jobs of their soldiering careers. 