Then, there was a ceasefire! At least, there was supposed to be. Detente had become the fashionable word in Africa and under pressure from South Africa, Rhodesia had become involved in the detente exercise. 
South Africa was keen to make friends with the new order in Mozambique and maintain its detente policy with black Africa. Despite its own domestic policies., South Africa felt it essential that Rhodesian whites reach an agreement with the black nationalists. 
South Africa’s ally in the detente exercise, Kenneth Kaunda of Zambia, was anxious for the bickering black nationalists to unite and talk to the Rhodesian premier. He had much to gain from a settlement Abiding by sanctions and reducing trade with Rhodesia had cost Zambia dearly. According to the UN Economic and Social Council, the cost to Zambia from January 1973 to mid-1974 alone was £112 million. 
Ian Smith was persuaded to resume talks with the nationalists ... and the nationalists agreed to come under one umbrella organisation of the reconstituted ANC, with Bishop Abel Muzorewa as the compromise chairman. 
In December, 1974, a ceasefire was announced. Detainees, including nationalist leaders, were to be released and negotiations without preconditions would be held 
But it soon became obvious that the nationalists had no intention of abiding by any ceasefire, and less than two weeks after the ceasefire announcement, four South African policemen were cut down. 
Ironically, it was the ceasefire which had cost them their lives. They were stopped on a road in north-eastern Rhodesia by apparently peaceful ZANLA pretending to be observing the truce. But it was all a hoax and the four policemen were disarmed and then murdered in cold blood. 
By dropping their guard and allowing the nationalists time to comply with the ceasefire, Rhodesia had effectively spared the lives of countless enemy inside the country and lost ground in the process. The nationalists were able to move out of Rhodesia with impunity. 
Releasing the nationalist leaders back into the terrorist fold, at a time when the metropolitan government in Portugal was handing over to FRELIMO, would ultimately lead to an escalation in the war. Nkomo, leader of ZIPRA, demanded and got every family in his support area of Matabeleland to send one man out to Zambia for training, and his recruits were streaming out of the country at the rate of 3000 a month. 
In January, 1975, as part of the detente scenario, South Africa ordered the withdrawal of the South African Police from positions along the Zambezi Valley. The SAP had been technically supporting Rhodesian forces since the late 1960s to prevent South African-born terrorists infiltrating through Rhodesia to South Africa. 
They were to be withdrawn totally on August 1, 1975, as an inducement to the nationalists to attend another constitutional conference. However, the conference, held at Victoria Falls, failed to produce an agreement.
(Elements of the South African Defence Force - members of the crack reconnaissance units - would however, secretly return to work with the SAS on external missions, operating towards the end of the war as D Squadron. SAS.) 
The detente period was a particularly difficult time for the security forces. All external operations were stopped and security forces were ordered not to shoot or take offensive action against insurgents heading away from Rhodesia - and therefore back to their bases. They could only be eliminated as they made their way towards Rhodesia. 
The SAS, having been stopped from their cross-border role, embarked on a period of internal operations and retraining … but when it became obvious that the ceasefire was not working, the SAS were tasked to get back into Tete. 
A flamboyant brigadier at Army Headquarters put the SAS commander Brian Robinson and his intelligence officer, Scotty McCormack, in the picture. 
“Okay chaps!” he said. “Blue Sector (Tete Province) is on. You can go back in - but you’ve got to go in quietly.” 
Scotty immediately turned to the SAS commander to ask: “Have you got any silent landmines sir?” 
It was obvious that landmines were out ... and they were told quite categorically that they were not to tangle with FRELIMO. 
What followed was a very low-key exercise - reconnaissance and intelligence gathering, checking the roads, establishing the routes; typical SAS work. 
It was to be a terrible phase. The conditions were bad ... the bush was incredibly thick and the operators had to carry copious quantities of water. Yet despite the hardships, the SAS’s intelligence dossier was growing. 
Part of the unit’s job was to try and increase the effectiveness of the new border fence which had gone up Over an extensive part of the north-eastern border and to sweep it for enemy spoor, acting as advanced eyes and ears for the rest of the army.
In September, 1975, the various patrols were choppered from their camp at the airstrip at Marymount Mission in the north-east.
Within a few days, tragedy had struck. A twenty-strong group of FRELIMO had closed in on an SAS patrol, using the cover of dead ground. Then, with the FRELIMO leader shouting his orders, they swept through the bush with weapons blazing. 
Corporal Kelvin Storie was killed immediately and another man wounded. Then with the FRELIMO leader standing over the dead man’s body, patrol commander Sergeant Flash Smythe and national serviceman Gary Stack mounted a counterattack, killing the enemy commander, chasing the numerically-superior FRELlMO away and recovering their radio, which FRELIMO were about to capture. 
Flash had done a first-class job as he was to do throughout the war and national serviceman Gary Stack had also acquitted himself extremely well on his first bush trip. He had done everything he was supposed to ... obeying Flash’s commands and helping to contribute to the successful counter-attack.
But one man had been killed and it had been a sad incident.