Tales of courage and adventure abound in the annals of the world-wide Special Air Service, some are public knowledge, and others must for security reasons remain forever untold.
One of the most famous stories involves the daring mid-air rescue by Sergeant Mick Reeves of 22 SAS, who is mentioned in this history as he subsequently emigrated to Rhodesia and joined the ranks of the Rhodesian SAS.
In September, 1967, Mick. then 36, was spending the weekend at a civilian sport parachute centre in the English Midlands and was acting as jump master for a group of novices - a task that involved leaning out of the plane on the final approach to the drop zone and shouting corrections to the pilot.
Once over the correct spot, Mick instructed the pilot to cut the engine to reduce the slipstream, then told one of the novices to jump out of the plane.
The man obeyed the order, but instead of floating down under his canopy, he found himself spinning precariously at the end of his static line, the thin webbing strap attached to the aircraft at one end and a parachutist's pack at the other. The parachutist is suspended on this line until it pulls his chute out of his pack.
This time the static line had malfunctioned and the parachute was not going to mushroom.
It was impossible to pull the man back into the plane, and had he pulled his reserve parachute, it would have entangled in the plane's tail. And if the plane had landed with the man still attached to the static line, he would have been dragged to his death.
Mick got the pilot to pull away from the built-up urban area and return to the drop zone then instructed him to keep circling until the problem was sorted out.
He then left the aircraft and coolly climbed down the static line. The friction burned through his gloves but his grip never faltered.
Having reached the man, he wrapped his legs and an arm around him and signalled the plane that all was well. By now the plane had climbed, giving them more height and time. Then, having checked they were back over the drop zone, Mick cut through the static line with his knife.
As they fell, he grabbed the handle on the man's reserve parachute, and yanked it, then held on to the novice again. The reserve canopy opened, and Mick released his grip on the man, and hurtled away into a freefall.
The novice landed safely and Mick's own freefall rig opened just a few seconds before he hit the ground. He rounded off his remarkable performance with a classic textbook landing roll.
He was duly awarded the George Medal for his actions, and it was no wonder that by the time Mick reached Rhodesia, he was already something of a legend.