Mac McIntosh had been tasked to command a reconnaissance patrol to establish the presence of a suspected terrorist camp near the Zamchiya business centre, twenty kilometres (12 miles) into south-east Mozambique.
The region itself was a frozen “no go” area to security forces other than the Selous Scouts who were operating there in their normal pseudo role, and apart from this SAS reconnaissance mission, no other troops were allowed into the area for fear of mistaking the Scouts for the enemy and eliminating them.
The Selous Scouts had twice attempted the same reconnaissance in their pseudo role and had been compromised on both occasions, and Mac McIntosh didn’t really think that he and his small team could do any better, particularly in view of the vast numbers of locals in the area. who were very pro-ZANLA.
A glance at the map alone, showing the many African kraals throughout the region, was a good indication of the problems they might encounter.
To have a white four-man callsign, albeit blackened-up and wearing terrorist gear, skulking around that neck of the woods, would certainly not be without its risks.
Mac was a fitness fanatic and he chose three other superbly fit soldiers to go on the mission. There was Guy Peel, the toughest Dutchman in the unit and as tall as he was broad, Melvin Bellman, as fit and as tough a soldier as anyone could find, and Rog Hartman, who boasted the longest legs in the squadron.
The four men deployed into south-east Mozambique by chopper and were put down some distance away from the target area to avoid any suspicion and to give them a sporting chance of pulling off the mission.
It was obvious from the outset that the mission was going to be no walkover. There were so many African kraals in the area that in some places they were only 500 metres apart. And, even though it was quite late, there were groups of Africans milling around.
Carefully, the four SAS men eased their way into the area, skirting around the many clusters of huts, lying low a.t the sound of voices, the yapping of dogs, until they had eventually negotiated their way through dozens of kraals and were on the outskirts of the last little village.
It had taken them all night and by now the sun was coming up. They would have to find some cover soon before the villagers were up and about.
There was a distinct lack of cover but a slight drop on the other side of a footpath offered some hope. They based up there for the day but it was so open that they couldn’t sit up for fear of being seen … and the four soldiers spent a very uncomfortable day virtually lying on their backs, hoping that no one would walk into them.
Miraculously, they managed to escape detection that first day … and that night, they continued their approach towards the area of the suspected terror base.
The following morning found them with not too much time to spare and at the base of a slight hilL There were scatterings of bush and a few trees on the hill and so much foliage that they felt it might prove an ideal spot to hide them from the prying eyes of interested passers-by.
They could sit the day out there and venture out that night to do a close-in reconnaissance of the surrounding area to establish the presence of ZANLA.
They headed for the cover of a huge baobab tree about one-third of the way down the hill on the far slope ... and were particularly careful no one saw them as they cautiously snaked their way through the dense undergrowth.
They based up near the baobab tree, and the commander positioned Guy Peel up the massive tree to keep a look-out for intruders. The broad baobab was so tall and so well branched that it was highly unlikely he would be seen in such a hiding place.
Mac McIntosh ventured out from their base to take some bearings and determine their exact location … then he, Melvin Bellman and Rog Hartman settled down to catch up on their sleep while the going was good, leaving Guy Peel - celebrating his 21st birthday that day - up his tree keeping watch.
All was quiet. There was just the faint rustle of grass. The sun beat down on the three SAS men dozing in the shade of the giant tree.
Suddenly, sentry Guy Peel glanced down from the tree to see three ZANLA men.
They had silently made their way through the thick undergrowth and were now standing directly beneath his tree.
The incredulous soldier eased off his branch and stood pressing his body flat against the tree trunk, trying his best to keep a very low profile, hoping against hope that the three men would not look up and see him; would not walk around the other side of the giant tree where his three colleagues were sprawled out, off-guard and maybe even asleep.
The three ZANLA lingered at the base of the tree for a while, then turned and retraced their steps, leaving a relieved but nevertheless agitated soldier still safely hidden up his tree.
As soon as it was safe, he clambered down and shook Mac McIntosh awake.
Mac was just as amazed as the trooper that ZANLA were out looking for them. Had they been seen moving through the night? Had someone seen the commander when he went off on his own that morning? What had put the terrorists on to their spoor? A hundred possibilities flashed through his mind.
Off in the distance, the four SAS men could hear women shouting in the fields. Then men joined in. Mac didn’t like their predicament one little bit. They would have to leave the hill and get going.
He had no sooner ordered his men to gather their kit together and get ready to move out. than an incredible volume of fire, the likes of which they had never experienced before, was directed towards their hill.
Thousands of small arms rounds were being fired at them, and occasionally an RPG-7 rocket would hurtle through the air.
It didn’t take many minutes for the four SAS men to realise that the forty-odd attackers out there didn’t know their exact location … and they lay low holding their fire so as not to give away their position.
Signaller, Rog Hartman got out a message to the base in Chipinga and called the choppers to extricate them. But although the choppers had been earmarked specially for the mission, they had gone out on a fireforce call, and there was thus no immediate air support available for Mac and his men.
The enemy fire lasted twenty minutes then began to subside, although every so often there would be sporadic bursts from different areas.
Finally the firing ceased and the Rhodesians lay low.
Now the four SAS men could hear ZANLA shouting at each other as they worked their way towards them from the opposite side of the hill.
At midday, the radio crackled into new life and an SAS man back in base assured them he had personally been to sort out The Blues and that if the pilots didn’t recover the SAS immediately they had returned from their fireforce action, he would go and knock their blocks off.
Meanwhile, back on the hill, everything had become deathly quiet. There was no shooting and no shouting. Perhaps everyone had gone home? But the firing soon started up again and it was more intense that the first barrage.
This time, 100 enemy had encircled the hill and were running around saturating the area with smallarms fire, rockets and mortar bombs. They were still trying to draw the Rhodesians’ fire, but the SAS very wisely lay low.
Shouts of “Stop your fire - we’re sweeping through”, were followed by the sound of running, then another bout of saturating fire.
Quickly, the SAS signaller got back on the radio with an urgent request for emergency air support. The choppers were still unavailable but the good news was that a Lynx was on its way.
The SAS had their haversacks and rifles ready, but the time was not quite fight to make a break for it There were far too many people out there searching for them at this stage: better lie low as long as they could.
The four men could hear enemy voices getting closer. Suddenly, two ZANLA men appeared on the scene, one from either side of the baobab tree … and one opened up on Mac McIntosh and Rog Hartman lying nearby.
Immediately, Melvin Bellman swung into action and peppered both enemy with a hail of rifle rounds. Simultaneously. Mac and Rog Hartman opened fire on the other ZANLA... and both wounded enemy took off into the thicket.
The SAS grabbed their kit and sprinted up the hill back the same way they had come.
Sometimes the commander was in the lead. occasionally Rog Hartman with his long legs overtook him. The order was all very changeable as they ran for their lives.
Before long they had left their hill behind and were heading for open ground - the only route available to get them back to white man’s land and home. As they ran across the path leading to the open patch, they were fairly bunched up, the total distance between the front man and the one at the back was a mere 15 metres.
The first two SAS men darted across the path. Then, incredibly, before the other two could do the same, a lone ZANLA ran straight between them, then continued on his way unsuspecting, not noticing the blackened-up Rhodesians for what they were. It was just like a scene from the movies.
The SAS were now beginning to get slightly more confident Having successfully got clear of their hill no one seemed to be chasing them. Maybe, ZANLA and their FRELIMO and militia friends thought they were still hiding up on the hill? They felt really done in, and for the first time since beginning their cross-country run, they afforded themselves the luxury of a stop, resting in a dip near some loose rocks, to catch their breath, have a drink and make a plan.
They were bloody lucky to have got away safely from the hill the SAS told each other, not, they conceded, that they didn’t have problems ahead.
They looked around and studied the countryside, realising that if something went wrong and they were forced to lie low, they would still be totally exposed. For there was no cover anywhere ...  just acres of old cut and burned out maizelands.
There were four African huts to their south. An old man and a young boy were standing nearby staring at the four soldiers. Then the old man raised his gnarled hand and gave them a friendly wave.
All too soon, it was time to get going again. They slung their packs on their backs, picked up the rest of the kit and set off, walking this time, sensing the pressure had eased.
But they had barely gone ten metres when all hell broke out around them again and machinegun rounds pounded the rocks.
It was a classic ambush - and it was top marks to ZANLA. They had lined up six RPD machineguns behind the little huts in the kraal not fifty metres from the SAS... and as the four soldiers scrambled hell-for-leather up the ledge of loose rocks, ZANLA began to put down more than 1 000 rounds.
Rog Hartman was moving so fast and so low that he walked all over his hands, tearing his fingers apart and crushing his nails. But it was his hide, not his hands, that was concerning him right then.
Then Melvin Bellman fell. The rounds were bursting all around him and the rocks and soil were spraying in every direction. But he soon righted himself without so much as a scratch.
Then it was Mac McIntosh’s turn. He stumbled and fell, and the dust from the ZANLA bullets covered his face.
Bellman shouted across and started to ran towards him. But Mac waved him away and the soldier knew his commander was all right.
Incredibly, they all got over the ridge without so much as a nick or a hit through any of their packs or equipment.
But this was no time to congratulate themselves and they were off and running again, this time heading across the open undulating countryside in the direction of a river.
The four Rhodesians had soon reached the river, and, while running through a herd of grazing cattle, they came in for another burst of machinegun fire.
The enemy were getting clever, but not that clever. ZANLA were making sure not to get too close to the fleeing soldiers. Every now and then, the SAS would catch a glimpse of the forty-odd follow-up group chasing them with their mortars and rockets.
The Rhodesians would stop, turn around, send a few rounds towards ZANLA who would drop to earth - and the SAS would travel on a bit further.
Up and down the undulating countryside they ran … over open areas ... through little kraals ... around kraals.
There were civilians everywhere, and as soon as the soldiers raced by, they all shrieked: “Vari-pano. Vari-pano (They’re here, they’re here)”.
A little picannin with his jacket pulled over his head was walking along in front of them just like a helpless little old man. But as the soldiers flew by him, he too screeched “Vari-pano. vari-pano” to the follow-up group.
Through the kraals and maizelands the four men raced and it was their sheer speed, adrenalin and a love of life that was keeping them ahead of the mortar bombs and machinegun fire.
As they ran, strange thoughts flitted across their minds.
What if one man stopped a round? Would they - could they - finish him off? It was certain that there was no chance of one man surviving on his own. On second thoughts, perhaps they would all decide to stand and fight alongside the injured man? But then, being up against such heavy odds, they knew damn well that even as a group, they would not escape with their lives.
Everything was on the opposition’s side; nothing on their When on earth would the Lynx arrive?
Somehow the enemy follow-up party had managed to put little groups along the route to cut them off. As Mac McIntosh and his men sped along, they couldn’t quite understand how that had happened. They had been running practically non-stop, so it couldn’t be people from the same group who had overtaken them and were trying to stop them. The main group must have some sort of communication with the cut-off groups waiting further ahead, they finally reasoned.
Now they had their old enemies chasing behind, mortaring them as they ran ... groups running with them ... civilians aiding and abetting - and there was much shouting and excitement.
Then ahead, a fate almost as dreaded as enemy bullets - a thicket entwined with painful buffalo beans. As they ploughed their way through them, sending fine, almost invisible, clouds of tiny hairs billowing into the air to settle on their skin and clothes with irritating, tearful consequences, they griped their teeth and thought of the alternatives.
Then they managed to stop and catch their breath. Quickly Rog Hartman got out another signal requesting immediate hot extraction and air cover.
This time it was good news. The Hunters would be with them in one hour; the choppers 25 minutes later. If only they could hang on until then.
By now, the SAS reconnaissance team had had all they could take. The general feeling was that they should stop and fight it out. But the commander insisted they keep going. They could make it. Mac McIntosh urged them, and he knew he was right. There wasn’t one weak member in the callsign to slow them down.
All too soon, the battle began again ... And, as Rog Hartman’s long legs carried him away, the antenna of his radio dragged in the dirt behind him.
There were a couple more incidents and then they reached the end of the maizelands. Now they had arrived at a fairly wooded area. It was the first bit of decent cover they had seen since they set off twenty kilometres (12 miles) and almost three hours ago.
Here at last was the chance of getting into a good position, enabling them to draw the enemy into the killing ground. On the other hand, it was on a riverline. They could get themselves trapped.
They glanced at their watches. It was 14h50: still twenty minutes until the Lynx appeared overhead. They must only be about two kilometres from the border, not, they knew, that it would deter the enemy from pursuing them.
They decided to go into the bush after all: but Rog Hartman and Guy Peel stopped in their tracks before they could join the other two in the undergrowth. They saw a very well-armed group looking for spoor, watching to see if they had gone through the rivedine into the bush ... and the two SAS men sank to earth.
They watched the enemy trackers link up with another group of 120 men running along the ridgeline only 100 metres away from them. There was a cut-off group on their right, another on the left and the back-up group closing in behind - and they were blocked in.
They were surrounded, outnumbered and the situation didn’t look like improving just yet. ZANLA had already fired 5 000 rounds in exchange for their twenty. There were 180 heavily-armed men against four.
Every now and then they saw the box slowly closing in on them. ZANLA had got the SAS in a no-win position and it was clear the enemy were enjoying the cat-and-mouse game. It was a ploy adopted by both sides at one time or another when they felt in a position of confidence. This time, it was the Rhodesians who were the mice.
During the lull that followed, Mac decided against trying to get out of the spot they were in. Instead, they would try to hold the position as long as they could. But if ever there was a time for a hot extraction, this was it The little group called for immediate air support. Now they just had to wait and hope for the best.
If ZANLA were to rush them, they would probably be able to account for several before being completely overrun by such superior numbers.
The ZANLA men closed in again ... teasing ... holding their fire ... prolonging the cat-and-mouse game.
Away to the north, well out of vision, a Lynx was already airborne with a request to Mac and his team to state their exact position.
The four men were unsure. They had entered the area at night and they had been running non-stop for hours. All they knew was they had been heading in the general direction of good ol’ Rhodesia and home.
To add to their problems the radio was faulty and was only working intermittently. Eventually though, they gave a few general directions and very soon afterwards the familiar sight of a friendly Rhodesian war plane could be seen ten kilometres (six miles) to the north.
It was one hell of a comfort to see it, but there was still a long time to go until the choppers could swoop in for the rescue.
ZANLA’s decision not to take on the vulnerable, cornered men the moment they had them boxed in was a big mistake. For now it meant that the callsign were in with a chance of escaping with their lives.
As the Lynx, armed with an MAG machinegon, came overhead, the enemy was forced to turn their collective attentions away from the SAS and on to the circling plane, which although keeping faidy high, was close enough to be in real danger if a lucky shot hit it. The ZANLA men were certainly doing their best to shoot it from the sky and were even firing mortars at it.
The minutes ticked by. The SAS consulted their watches again. Would the choppers never come?
Then, at long last, they heard them.
Below, some of the ZANLA men began to get a bit bolder and were creeping forward, shooting into likely cover, still unable to see Mac and his party, but hoping to drawtheir fire nonetheless. The four Rhodesians had no intention of giving the game away now and continued to maintain their low profile.
As the two choppers came over the treeline from the west, the soldiers threw phosphorus grenades to indicate their positions. The choppers swooped in and hovered. The four men threw their kit in, then jumped aboard. Then up they climbed, plucked from the middle of a hornets’ nest and snatched to safety.
Within a minute, the pilot had told them that they were back over the border.
“So guys.” he said turning to them, “what’s all the excitement about then?” The four sweating men exchanged a look and said nothing. They were too tired and too relieved to tell of their close call.
It was only after they had been dropped off at Chipinga and they had time to reflect on the events of those past few days, that they had to agree that someone had very definitely been looking after them.
Three of them privately paid tribute to Mac McIntosh for what he had done for them. His reading of the situation, his drive and his ability to keep them going when they had had enough, had largely contributed to their successful escape and survival.
For when they totted up all the odds - ZANLA’s great numbers, the very good ambushes they had set up, the help of the locals - the SAS knew that they hadn’t really deserved to get out of their predicament.
It had demonstrated again just how difficult it was for blackened-up white soldiers to operate clandestinely in such a heavily-populated and hostile area.
They had more than conclusively achieved their aim, They could report a very strong enemy presence indeed in the area. The suspicion was now a certainty, vividly etched on four men’s memories.
And it was certainly one hell of a way to celebrate your 21st birthday ...