The concept of pseudo counter-insurgency. which was to playa large part in the Rhodesian war, was studied from two separate angles in the early days. 
On one hand, hunter and consultant ecologist Allan Savory who had run bushcraft survival courses and advocated the use of tracker-trained troops and antiterrorist units had worked on his concept in which he believed the best way to hunt down. fight and understand the enemy was to think and train as a terrorist. And if ever overrun, men could penetrate and operate as terrorists behind the lines. 
On the other, Brigadier John Hickman, ultimately to become Commander of the Rhodesian Army, was also staunchly advocating the pseudo idea. 
Hickman had been in Malaya and had gained a wealth of knowledge about pseudo-operations, gangs and counter-gangs. As well as having researched the topic, he had written papers on the benefits to be gained from “turning” captured terrorists. Then, to take that one step further, he advocated that a unit be formed to incorporate the “turned” terrorists so that they could be used in counter-insurgency; using them, In effect, against their former comrades. 
To take an enemy, put a rifle in his hand and stick him in the Rhodesian Army, was a totally revolutionary idea and Hickman got nowhere with the concept.
Rhodesia’s answer to any terrorist who was caught was clear. After he had his day in court, and no matter how much he had helped the police track down his former comrades, he invariably had a date with the hangman. 
Brigadier Hickman had aired his views when he was a major. The next time he raised the matter was as Brigade Commander at JOC Hurricane following the Centenary farm attacks. 
Special Branch officers involved in the war from the outset, and even before, were particularly keen on the pseudo plan. 
Their role was to piece together the many snippets of intelligence from wherever they could get them ... and through well-placed informers, they knew what the terrorists had planned over the years and knew where their training camps were throughout Africa and abroad. 
But now that the war had been taken into the local population and the masses were being politicized, that job might not be so easy. It could mark the beginning of the end. To stay current, to stay ahead before events got out of hand, would call for a wealth of intelligence. 
What was needed were people who could pose as terrorists, passing themselves off among the local population and to be convincing enough to fool the enemy themselves. Their role would be to gather intelligence, locate insurgent groups and when the time was right, eliminate the terrorists; or stir things up and set one group of nationalists against another. 
Brigadier Hickman approached SAS Sergeants Andre Rabie and Stretch (Alan) Franklin and RLI Sergeant Pete Clementshaw in the White Rhino pub at Kariba and put the pseudo idea to them. They all liked the idea and Andre and Stretch who were instructors at the Tracking Wing at Kariba, were detached to John Hickman for special duties. 
It was a top secret assignment and none of their friends knew where they were and whether in fact they were still in the SAS. Being SAS - trained, they knew better than to ask. 
Andre, Stretch and Pete were joined by three African soldiers from the RAR .They also had a captured terrorist, one of those responsible for the Centenary farm attacks, who had been caught by Portuguese troops and handed over. 
The little team was called The 4949s after the number on the file kept at Special Branch headquarters. 
At first the three white soldiers put the black troops through their paces and then S8 officer Pete Stanton came in to teach them terrorist methods - what to eat, what not to eat, is an art in itself - for if a local did not trust them and offered them certain foods, which they accepted, he would immediately realise they were pseudos, and not real terrorists. 
The enemy were constantly changing these foods and it was SB’s task to keep abreast of the changes, as out-of-date information could have fatal consequences. 
Once Pete Stanton had trained the soldiers, he handed them over to the captured terrorist and The 4949s learned all they could from him. 
Special Branch provided The 4949s with their money and kit and found them a safe-house to use between their deployments. 
It was still a highly sensitive operation and as the north-east remained a hot area, fairly elaborate arrangements had to be made to get them to their safe-house, for had they been seen - blackened-up and armed to the teeth as they were - they would have been shot out of hand. 
They only travelled in their covered van in the dead of night when there were no road blocks to stop them, and it was only when the African house servant had been sent out of the way did they dare risk nipping into the safety of the house. 
The houseboy never got to see them in their blackened-up state. All he really knew of the mystery was that he was going through bath cleaner like it was going out of fashion. 
Sadly, Andre Rabie was accidentally killed while working on the pseudo idea. He made a tragic map-reading error and was killed by another member of the security forces. His death was a tremendous blow to the SAS and the Army. He had been one of the personalities of the squadron. Andre received a posthumous award, making him a  Member of the Order of Legion of Merit (Military Division) for distinguished service over and above the call of duty on operations. 
Eventually, Prime Minister Ian Smith ordered that an army regiment be formed to carry out pseudo work, and the Selous Scouts unit was formed with an ex-Malayan SAS soldier, Major (later Lieutenant-Colonel) Ron Reid-Daly, a former RLI Regimental Sergeant Major, as the founder commander.
 The[1] unit was named after the famous nineteenth-century scout and hunter, Frederick Courteney Selous, upon whom Sir Henry Rider Haggard based his equally-famous character, Alan Quartermain in King Solomon’s Mines. 
Overnight, the army had got itself a glamour unit. 
To the SAS hierarchy, this particular aspect was perfect. The SAS deliberately played down their role ... they certainly did not want the glory, the publicity and the focus that was suddenly being given to the Scouts.
The new regiment attracted men from other units and former SAS members were there to play a very important part in founding the Selous Scouts. SAS strength was reduced to 25 men as a result, which was fewer than when the unit moved down from Ndola. 
It was a difficult time for the SAS, but the commander was adamant that there was going to be no lowering of standards just to boost numbers. Far rather have 25 good men than 100 mediocre ones. 
The SAS was a special forces unit with a unique professionalism - and that’s the way it was going to stay.

￼
[1] Sunday Times and Michael Evans