A/A: Anti-aircraft
AK: Kalashnikov or AK-47, the true assault weapon of most revolutions: also used by Rhodesian Special Forces on cross-border operations.
Alpha Bomb: One kilogram bomb which bounced before exploding in the air.
Ammo: Ammunition.
ANC: African National Congress (South Africa).
ANC: African National Council (Rhodesia).
AP: Anti-personnel landmine.
Baobab: African tree with extremely thick trunk and angular branches, often known as the Upside Down Tree as the branches resemble roots.
Bazooka: Name used by terrorists for RPG-7 rocket launcher.
BigMeans: TR-48, the high frequency long-range radio, main lifeline back to Tactical Headquarters and Salisbury, used throughout the Army. The SAS almost exclusively used Morse as it was more accurate on very deep-penetration operations.
Biltong: Dried meat cut into thin strips (in America, Jerky).
Black-Is-Beautiful: Black camouflage cream.
Blues: Army term for the Air Force.
BSAP: British South Africa Police.
Buffalo Beans: (Mucuna coriacea Bak.) One of the Security Forces most dreaded enemies! When ripe, gives off clouds of fine hairs which are highly irritating.
Bundu: Bush.
Bunker Bomb: One kilogram Rhodesian custom-made bomb with a four-six second hand-grenade fuse.
Callsign: A group of operators, each group with its own radio identification number.
Casevac/casevacked: Casualty evacuation.
Camo: Camouflage.
Chimurenga: A Shona word for "War of Liberation".
CIO: Central Intelligence Organisation, umbrella organisation of all intelligence.
COIN: Counter Insurgency.
CO: Commanding Officer.
ComOps: Combined Operations, nerve-centre of the Rhodesian war machine, which co-ordinated the various arms of the Security Forces.
Cordtex: Instantaneous detonating cord.
Dak: Dakota.
DZ: Dropping Zone.
Fire Force: Highly mobile troops generally ferried by helicopters direct to contact with the terrorists. Each flight of troop-carrying helicopters was escorted by a helicopter gunship.
FN: (Fabrique Nationale) Belgian designed semi-automatic and automatic NATO weapon on general issue to Rhodesian Security Forces.
FRELIMO: (The Front for the Liberation of Mozambique) which became the ruling party of Mozambique.
Fred/Freddie: Nickname for FRELIMO.
Frontline States: Tanzania, Zambia, Mozambique, Botswana and Angola.
G-Car: Troop-carrying Alouette helicopter with twin machineguns.
Gatecrasher: Rhodesian-manufactured charge designed to blow locks off gates.
H-Hour: Time attack due to start.
Hot Extraction: To be pulled from a dangerous situation. A true hot extraction was to be winched into helicopter using hot extraction harness worn by SAS troops.
Hot Pursuit: Cross-border pursuit of the enemy.
Hulk: Rhodesian-manufactured charge, powerful enough to blow man-size hole in a wall.
Indaba: Traditional meeting of African chiefs.
Jesse: Thick thorn type bush.
JOC: Joint Operational Command, local military headquarters where uniformed Police, the Army, the Air Force and Special Branch co-operated and worked in harmony to pool their intelligence.
K-Car: (Kill-car.) Alouette with 20 millimetre cannon, and often carrying airborne commander.
Knock-Knocks: Rhodesian-manufactured charges designed to open door locks.
Kopje: Hill.
Kraals: African villages.
Lemon: Military operation that came to nothing.
LUP: Lay-Up Position.
Lynx: Cessna 337.
LZ: Landing Zone.
Maningi's/Mabuno: Derogatory name for whites.
MNR: Mozambique National Resistance, dedicated to the overthrow of FRELIMO.
Mujibas: Unemployed youths who acted as the eyes, ears and runners for terrorists.
NCO: Non-Commissioned Officer.
Ndebele: Tribe indigenous to the western part of Rhodesia.
NS: National Service.
O Group: Orders Group.
OAU: Organisation of African Unity.
OC: Officer Commanding.
2IC: Second-In-Command.
Op: Operation.
ParaDak: Dakota bearing paratroopers.
PE: Plastic explosive.
PF: Patriotic Front. so-called alliance between Robert Mugabe's ZANU and Joshua Nkomo's ZAPU.
PJI: Parachute Jumping Instructor.
QM: Quartermaster."
Rafting-up: Linking boats side-by-side to form raft effect.
RAR: Rhodesian African Rifles.
Ratpacks: Rations.
Recce: Reconnaissance.
Ringmain: Device for connecting up several explosive charges, enabling them to detonate simultaneously. Normally Cordtex
RF: lan Smith's Rhodesian Front party.
RLI: Rhodesian Light Infantry.
RPD: Portable light machinegun.
RPG-7: Rocket launcher.
R and R: Rest and Recreation.
RV: Rendezvous.
SAS: Special Air Service.
SB: Special Branch.
Shabeen: A place where liquor is sold illegally.
Shrike: British exploder mechanism used in demolitions.
Shona: Tribe indigenous to central and eastern Rhodesia.
Sitrep: Situation Report
SKS: (Simonov) 7,62 millimetre semi-automatic carbine.
Small Means: Short-range VHF radio, mainly used in ground to air communications.
Stag: Guard duty.
Strela (or SAM-7): Soviet manufactured heat-seeking missile.
Sunray: Leader.
SWAPO: South West Africa People's Organisation.
TA, TF: Territorial Army, Territorial Force.
Terr: Nickname for terrorist.
TTL: Tribal Trust Land.
UANC: United African National Council (formerly ANC) of Bishop Abel Muzorewa.
UDI: Unilateral Declaration of Independence.
WO: Warrant Officer.
Wombles: Police Reservists.
ZANU: Zimbabwe African National Union of Robert Mugabe, the political wing.
ZANLA: Zimbabwe African National Liberation Army, ZANU's military wing, Training was mainly Chinese orientated, and essentially Maoist in character.
ZAPU: Zimbabwe African People's Union of Joshua Nkomo, the political wing.
ZIPRA: Zimbabwe People's Revolutionary Army, ZAPU's military wing. Training was Russian-influenced,

