“The book is full of the most amazing stories of sheer cheek and deadly courage” - Daily Dispatch

“I believe the research you have carried out has resulted in a very authentic account of the SAS contribution to the Rhodesian war” - LIEUTENANT-COLONEL BRIAN ROBINSON, the commanding officer of the SAS for the major part of the war and the man responsible for making the SAS what it was.

“A masterpiece” - GEOFF HILL, Crows Nest, Australia, editor of Rhodesians Worldwide.

“It is a story of meticulous planning, desperate courage and a flair well worthy of sister SAS regiments elsewhere in the world” - The Daily News

“Thank you for the opportunity you have given me in discovering what my brother was up to during his three years’ service with the SAS” - MRS PAT WILSENACH of Secunda, South Africa.

“The Elite is one of those rare books that combine being a ‘good read’ while providing a large body of valuable and interesting information. All too frequently, one is faced with work that is one or the other; coming across one of these exceptions is an exceptional pleasure” - Armed Forces.

“A classic in counter-insurgency” - radio interviewer.

“The fact that really surprised me was to learn of the numerous spies and double agents busy at work during the war, particularly in such high places as ComOps HQ” - NEIL DUNSTAN of Troyeville Johannesburg

“Barbara Cole has written possibly the most important book about the Rhodesian war from the military side” - Daily Dispatch.

“So much has been written on the Rhodesian bush war that any new book on it has to be exceptional and break new ground. The Elite does just that” - The Natal Mercury.

“In a fashion that reads almost like an adventure novel, Cole relates operations detailing not only the political and military motivations, but with emphasis on the operators who carried the missions out. And some of these missions seem like an action-writer’s imagination come true” - Rhodesian war specialist American JOHN COLEMAN in Soldier of Fortune

“Your book made such interesting reading that when I’d completed it, I was almost sorry it was over” - CEDRIC FLETCHER of Elliot, South Africa.
