Over the years, Zambia-based ZANU/ZANLA had been having a serious rethink about the question of access into Rhodesia. It had long ago become obvious that the confrontation tactics of 1966-71had to be discarded and an alternative infiltration route found to the suicidal Zambezi Valley.
The solution had to be hitherto hostile Mozambique. But now that FRELIMO were out and about, why couldn’t they infiltrate into Rhodesia in the wake of the safe corridor FRELIMO were creating in their own push southwards? Access would he quicker and easier and the Mozambique/Rhodesia border with its forests and mountains providing good cover from the air, made it excellent guerilla country.
Apart from the need for that vital infiltration route and strong rear base, the Chinese-trained ZANLA leaders also felt that the key to successful incursions was to exploit black discontent and motivate the local population by politically indoctrinating them, so as to he prepared for the coming confrontation. It was the tried and tested Maoist theory of peasant mobilization.
An approach was made to FRELIMO to use the Tete region of Mozambique as a vital rear base. But FRELIMO considered ZANLA no more than a splinter group, and of no real consequence, so apart from allowing a small team to join them in Tete in 1970, that all-important permission was not granted.
Besides, FRELIMO had offered the Tete facility to ZIPRA, their old friends. FRELIMO themselves were operating right to the Rhodesian frontier and were keen to help ZIPRA gain access to Rhodesia that way and were prepared to guarantee their supplies. The fact that ZIPRA did not seem in any hurry to take up their offer, did not unduly worry FRELIMO at that stage.
Yet two years later, it was a very different story. FRELIMO had still been unable to persuade ZIPRA to take up the offer and despaired of ever selling the idea to them.
FRELIMO had been under the mistaken impression that ZIPRA enjoyed the support of all black Rhodesians. But the truth was that Rhodesian Africans bordering Mozambique were Shona-speaking and, as such, supported ZANLA. not the Sindebele-speaking ZIPRA. ZIPRA realized only too well that they would have had a very difficult passage through a hostile area where the locals didn’t even speak their own language and were historically antagonistic towards their Matabeleland-based tribe.
Had ZIPRA taken up FRELlMO’s persistent offer, the final outcome might well have been very different for Rhodesia.
Eventually, after two years of negotiations with FRELIMO, ZANLA was given per-mission to establish close links with FRELIMO outposts and “liberated areas” in Mozambique.
For ZANLA it was a major breakthrough in their bid to bring majority rule to an independent Zimbabwe; for white-ruled Rhodesia, it was to mark the beginning of the end.
It meant that ZANLA could operate close to the border, recruit, gather intelligence and move in ammunition to north-east Rhodesia. The politicization of the local population meant that incoming groups could be offered assistance and intelligence and not reveal their presence to the security forces. Invariably, political motivation would win the day and recruits would join the “struggle”.
The Sindebele-speaking ZIPRA would continue to infiltrate across the rugged, sparsely populated Zambezi Valley.
Thus it was that the Rhodesian security forces were to face two enemy armies each using different tactics - one, ZANLA, which moved often in large groups working with the local population as a political force ... and the other, ZIPRA, which operated in small groups and worked solely in a military way.
Then in March 1972, police intelligence confirmed the presence of a reconnaissance group which had travelled from Magazine in Zambia to ZANLA 5base in Chifombo near Mwamjawanthu in Mozambique, ostensibly to select a route from Zambia through Mozambique to the Rhodesian border. The areas selected for infiltration covered a wide front .
Detective Section Officer Pete Stanton, of the Special Branch Terrorist Desk, Salisbury, was assured by local informers, sources in Zambia, and Mozambican refugees crossing into Rhodesia fleeing from FRELIMO, that there were ZANLA comratdes from the Sipolilo area of Rhodesia at FRELIMO’s Matimbe base. When he studied his map, he knew it had to make sense.
The camp was right next to the border. What would FRELIMO need with a base there? ZANLA, on the other hand, needed to be close to their recruiting sources. It was obvious ZANlA were carrying out a reconnaissance of the border area and assessing the attitude of the Rhodesian locals.
The Portuguese had always denied that ZANLA were in Mozambique or involved with FRELIMO. There was just no evidence. Rhodesians had the added worry that by the time the Portuguese troops reacted to a terrorist threat, the birds had flown.
Pete Stanton knew that if they were to get their evidence, it was necessary to outsmart the Portuguese. So at the next Portuguese Joint Operational Command meeting, Pete said he had information about a terrorist presence at Musengezi, which was in fact in the opposite direction from where the real threat lay.
As he had hoped, the Portuguese agreed to mount an operation there. Then Pete. casually asked if the SAS - at that time already deployed in Mozambique - could patrol near Gungwa Mountains. The Portuguese agreed and the SAS mounted a strike on Matimbe camp. They killed several enemy, although it was difficult to establish at that stage if they were FRELIMO or ZANLA, as they were all dressed alike.
But huge sacks of documents were recovered ... and in a little black notebook, Pete Stanton found all the documentary evidence he needed. “Go and tell Evensi that the Zimbabwe boys have arrived. This is secret Don’t tell anyone”, the message said in Shona. Pete knew of Evensi and that he came from Sipolilo in the northern part of Rhodesia
Further intelligence revealed that the locals had been politically indoctrinated and numerous recruits collected to undergo external terror training.
ZANLA were making no secret of the fact that they were planning a new strategy.
Following the resounding “No” vote given by Africans to the 1972 British Test of Acceptabitity of new settlement proposals to the Rhodesian issue, ZANLA leaders in Lusaka announced that after the up heaval caused by the Test, there were now enough Africans in Rhodesia willing to pick up guns and use them.
Several trusted cells had been set up in the rural areas and an all-out effort was being made to smuggle arms and ammunition into Rhodesia, ZANLA declared.
Their[1] aim was to break the “resistance threshold” of white Rhodesians. Explained the man behind it all, brilliant lawyer and ZANLA Operations Chief, Herbert Chitepo: ZANlA’s revolutionary warfare strategy was: “….. to attenuate the enemy forces by causing their deployment over the whole country. The subsequent mobilization of large numbers of civilians from industry, business and agriculture would cause serious economic problems. This would have a psychologically devastating effect on the morale of the Whites ...”

As[2] far back as March 1969. a Mr Davis M’Gabe had predicted: “Chimurenga is a Shona word which means ‘war of liberation’, Shona is the language of the native peoples of Zimbabwe, the land which the recent settlers call Rhodesia. If I were to tell you that a war of liberation is unfolding in Rhodesia you would probably call it wishful thinking. You could be wrong.”
During October and November. 1972, intelligence came to light that insurgents had infiltrated through Mozambique into north-east Rhodesia … and an internal operation, codenamed Tempest, was launched involving the RAR.
Three ZANLA men were picked up by SB ground coverage during the operation and Pete Stanton sat them down in a little trench for a bit of privacy, shooed away the scorpions, and got them to tell all they knew.
It was a very enlightening chat and Pete Stanton became one of the first members of the security forces to realize that things were indeed bad, and were going to get worse.
It was hard to believe that the ZANLA line had come so far south. It seemed to have moved 200 kilometres (120 miles) virtually overnight.
ZANLA was now about to launch a big push into Rhodesia, Pete Stanton was told. The three captures had been part of a group of 27 men who had carried war materials from Zambia through Mozambique and into Rhodesia, and their huge arms cache was hidden north-east of Mtoko. Planning was well advanced and ZANLA had divided the northern portion of Rhodesia into sectors, called Nehanda and Chaminuka.
The captured men readily agreed to show Pete Stanton their secret arms cache. It was hidden at a mountain but they had not been allowed to know its exact position.
Pete took them along a road north-east of Mtoko just as the sun was coming up. They seemed to recognize the area and, working on a time and distance scale of how long it had taken the terrorists who had hidden the cache to return to the rest of their comrades, they found themselves in a spot which seemed vaguely familiar to the captured men.
Then one man said he would show Pete a letter-box used by ZANLA and their local sympathizers for getting their instructions.
Pete, the captures and a couple of members of the RAR, followed a winding footpath until they got to a small tree growing out of a hill. The tree trunk was hollow and there was a stick, half-in, half-out of it.
Pete pulled out the forked stick and there were three letters attached to it, telling ZANLA what they were supposed to do in the coming confrontation. Pete copied the instructions down in his notebook, put the letters back on the stick and returned them to the tree. Next day, the security forces would ambush and dispatch two ZANLA who would call at the letter-box.
“Hey boss,” the RAR sergeant-major suddenly said to Pete, “what’s that behind you?”
Pete Stanton turned to see an 82 millimeter mortar lying in a crevice. As he got up to investigate, a leaf blew away, revealing something white, the size of a milk bottle top. Pete dug out a bottle of headache pills made in India, a very strange find indeed in such an unsophisticated spot in the middle of the Rhodesian bush.
Then they dug up another medical pack, and another, then scraped near a tree and unearthed the first of many ammunition boxes.
They literally unearthed a mountain full of weapons, landmines and ammunition. There were 9 000 small arms rounds alone. It was a vast haul and nothing like it had been seen in Rhodesia before. Soon the choppers were arriving to take it all away, and three loads were recovered from the mountainside cache.
In early December 1972, ZANLA together with large groups of porters carrying weaponry, and under the command of Rex Nhongo - later one of the ZANLA hierarchy - wound their way through Mozambique and entered Rhodesia between Mkumbura and Musengezi.
The scene was now set for ZANLA’s new offensive, the start of the new war of Chimurenga (the old being the rebellion against the whites in the 1890s).
As a result of the ZANLA men being picked up in the Mtoko region, the plan to infiltrate from that sector was abruptly called off.
It was now left to the group which had infiltrated in the Nehanda sector to make the first move. ZANLA had planned their new offensive for Christmas or the New Year when the country was celebrating and many soldiers would be on leave, but in view of the Mtoko party’s arrest, they decided to launch their attack earlier.
Their target was fairly random although they had heard allegations that the farmer at Altena Farm in the Centenary district, fifty kilometres (31 miles) from the border and 200 kilometres (124 miles) from Salisbury, had poor relations with his staff.
On the evening of December 21, the ten ZANLA closed in on the humble farmstead. Inside, the owner and his family slept soundly on that peaceful Wednesday before Christmas. Outside in the darkness, peace and goodwill were the last thoughts on the minds of the ZANLA men with their sophisticated RPG-7 rocket launcher and AK-47 assault rifles.
Suddenly, they stepped from the shadows ... and then their communist-supplied weapons sent a frightening clatter of rounds ripping through the homestead peppering the walls with a deadly hail of lead and injuring a young girl inside,
Then ZANLA’s thirty-second burst of bravado, designed mainly to impress the local African population was over and they ned into the nearby bush. But they were better trained than previous insurgents and took the precaution of planting a landmine, and cutting the telephone wires to hamper follow-up operations.
It was not a particularly spectacular incident and had little strategic value. But it did mark the first shots in the decisive phase of the war. From then onwards, terrorist attacks and incidents would be continuous, not sporadic as in the past.
Initially, there were many skeptics who, lulled into complacency by the insurgents’ inactivity through the previous few years, were making such comments as: “We’ll sort this little lot out and be home by Christmas.” But it was to take another seven Christmasses before peace came to war-ravaged Rhodesia.
For, from that first half-minute act of aggression, the country was to be plunged into years of bloody warfare, which would only end with the signing of the Lancaster House ceasefire agreement.
Fortunately, from the outset of Hurricane, as the new anti-terrorist operation was to be known, the Special Air Service was fully prepared.
Even before the attack, the unit had already been called out to Centenary where a terrorist-indoctrinated witchdoctor had been captured and disclosed the whereabouts of an arms cache.
Within hours of the alarm being raised at Altena Farm, a group of young SAS trackers were rudely awakened at Cranborne Barracks in Salisbury.
They looked at their watches. It was 04h30. Someone was standing over them telling them that a farmhouse had been attacked at Centenary and they were to get their kit together. A chopper would be arriving to pick them up in half-an-hour.
By the time they got to Altena Farm, the landmine had been found in the road near the homestead. But the terrorists had learned their anti-tracking lessons well, and despite intense effort by the SAS men, the spoor petered out. The elusive ZANLA were Just nowhere to be found.
The SAS set up their headquarters at a nearby farm. By now a Joint Operations Command(JOC} had been established at Centenary where the uniformed Police, the Army, the Air Force and Special Branch co-operated and worked in harmony to pool their intelligence.
Then another farmhouse, Whislefield, was attacked and once again the SAS trackers were shaken awake. But they were picked up in the darkness and there was nothing much they could do until it got light.
The trackers teamed up with an RLI support group and together they boarded a truck and set off for spoor.
As they approached a bend in the road, the SAS trackers got off and cut across the corner section to continue the search. Almost immediately, they picked up spoor and called the RLI over on their radio.
As the truck swung around the corner, disaster struck.
There was a tremendous thunderclap and the truck was catapulted into the air as the back wheel detonated a landmine that had been well-camouflaged in the sandy soil.
Corporal Norman Moore. who had been standing on the tailboard, was flung through the air, receiving serious injuries, which were to prove fatal. Several other RLI men were injured.
Quickly an SAS corporal raced to the wreck and pulled an injured soldier off. An RLI corporal had already leapt from the truck to aid his injured colleagues.
The SAS, the 15 RLI men and an old African Police tracker, immediately set off on the spoor. Their blood was up and they were determined to get the men responsible.
They tracked the entire day and slept that night on the spoor. As soon as it was light enough they set off again and got so close to them that when they came upon the hidden ZANLA camp, the fire was still burning.
Meanwhile, back at Centenary, the new SAS DC Major Brian Robinson decided to put stop-groups along the Musengezi River to cut the enemy off.
Corporal Danny Smith and his four men were hurriedly choppered in to a commanding position on some high ground near the river and had no sooner taken up their positions when they saw some ten enemy advancing in single file towards them, armed with automatic weapons, a machinegun and an RPG-7 rocket launcher.
Smith had deployed his men into favorable positions. As he saw it, the enemy had three routes available to them. Unluckily for them they chose the wrong one - and ran straight into Smith’s callsign.
At the end of the contact three terrorists had been killed and another surrendered. Next day, another wounded man surrendered. It was the first engagement since the war began in earnest and Smith was to get a Military Forces Commendation for hIS action that day.
By now, security force officers were no longer talking about sorting out the affair by Christmas. Now they were making it plain that it was going to be a long operation. A huge security net had been thrown around the Centenary area and it was declared a restricted area with no unauthorized visitors allowed in.
Territorial soldiers helped guard Centenary farms over the Christmas holidays and farmers joined their police reservist units in the massive seek-and-destroy sweeps through the rugged countryside.
The Rhodesians would soon realize that they were up against a better calibre of enemy than they had faced in the past. Soon the killings would begin and the farming community, some initially irritated by the troops trampling over their crops, would begin to realize their vulnerability.
“It is no fun living behind a three-metre fence, no fun spending nights at a time lying in ambush outside one’s own tobacco barns,” wrote visiting British journalist, Max Hastings. “Least fun of all when they know that they can reach no end; and that this is only the end of the beginning.”
Most of the SAS stayed in the Centenary area until early in the New Year on follow-up operations. But SAS DC Major Brian Robinson wanted his unit out of the area.
He had been totally against the SAS being involved in what was an infantry role, wandering around the countryside tracking down terrorists. The function of the SAS was external, not internal like other units.
They knew where the insurgents were coming from and it was obvious that if they were to be stopped, the war had to be taken to them while they were still in Mozambique. The sudden upsurge in incursions had to be stemmed. Their camps inside Mozambique had to be reconnoitered and their infiltration routes ambushed.
While several SAS trackers were to remain in the Centenary area for three months assisting other units to react to the increasing number of attacks, the rest of the squadron was pulled back to Salisbury to await the time when they could go external again.
They would not have long to wait...

￼
[1] Michael Evans
[2] Al Venter and Michael Evans