Operation Neutron, February-March, 1979 

Within six months of the security forces raid on ZANLA's Chimoio Circle, the area had once again become a problem. ZANLA had now moved into what was known as the Vanduzi Circle, 15 kilometres (nine miles) from Chimoio town, and had resited their camps between two mountains, Monte Bossa and Monte Urueri. 

ZANLA were now very alert to the possibility of security force attacks and their new site was in a thickly-treed area, providing good cover from Rhodesian war planes. 

The camp was very dispersed and far too spread out for a conventional attack ... and the Rhodesian planners decided to put someone in the area to assess where the critical areas lay, then at the right time, carry out an air strike. They also hoped to bait the inevitable hierarchy who usually came to inspect the bombed camp whereupon, the Rhodesians would mount another attack, 

Fonner SAS Captain Scotty McCom1ack.. now with the national intelligence team, had learned from a capture that ZANLA even had the services of a unique earlywarning system - a couple of tame baboons which went by the name of John and Janel 

So shell-shocked were they from their previous airstrikes that the faintest hint of a plane approaching would send them into a frenzy. The berserk baboons would ripup grass, leap into trees and frantically tear ofT leaves. Blessed with an incredible sense of hearing, their sudden peculiar behaviour was all ZANLA needed to send them running for cover. 

A four-men SAS team, under the command of Lieutenant Rich Stannard, was choppered into the area one night to recce the camp and monitor the occupants' movements and habits. 

They had been told that the camp housed 5000 ZANLA and judging by the amount of spoor they were finding, the SAS could well believe it. The tracks were so worn that the occupants had gouged a twenty centimetre furrow in the dirt. 

ZANLA were carrying out clearance patrols, checking for unexpected visitors and landmines up to ten kilometres (six miles) from the camp ... and in the end. Rich considered the security so good that they could not safely carry out a close-in reconnaissance ... and they returned to Salisbury. 

"C" Squadron commander Martin Pearse called Rich to his office and told him they would give it a break for now and would try going back into Vanduzi a few weeks later. 

Rich had very definite ideas of how he wanted to handle the op the next time around and put his theory to Martin. 

He pointed out that the four-man team did not really work in circumstances such as those at Vanduzi. It was impossible for four men carrying heavy Bergens to get in close to such a heavily-populated camp where the security was so good. 

He felt they would stand a much better chance if there were only two men using light-weight packs enabling them to move far and fast They would be able to cover a much greater distance than four men burdened with heavy packs. he added. 

Rich had long been impressed with the two-man operational concept ever since reading a book on the Malayan Emergency The Jungle is Neutral by Spencer Chapman. He put it to his squadron commander that they should take a leaf out of Chapman's book. 

By an amazing coincidence, Spencer Chapman was a name not unknown to Martin Pearse - he had been Martin's schoolteacher. 
254 


b
The two-man concept was not looked upon favourably in the SAS and with good reason too. Were one man injured, there was only one other availableto carry him out ... and he might not be in a position to do that 
Lieutenant Chris Schallenberg, the SAS's first Silver Cross soldier, had used the two-man concept when he was in the unit and he had even carried out a one-man close-in reconnaissance. But that was all a long time ago and it had not been done in the SAS since ... although Schulie, now in the Selous Scouts, continued to use the concept with spectacular results. 
Martin Pearse and Rich Stannard sat down and discussed the pros and cons of the two-man concept Martin could see the advantages and was flexible enough to go 
along with the idea 
Between them, they came up with a way of using the concept and, at the same time, 
providing the two operators with the necessary back-up. 
Rich, his partner and four others were to be choppered into the general Vanduzi area, although far enough away to prevent the enemy hearing the helicopters. Then, while most of the party set about establishing a finn base with radios, rations, water and medical kit, the two operators would move into the camp and carry out their 
close-in reconnaissance. 
They were to take the small lighter short-range radio, The Small Means, so as not to 
be weighed down. They would pass their messages back to theircollegues in the firm base who would also have the long-range radio enabling them to relay Rich's 
messages to Rhodesia. 
lfthe going got difficult, the two operators could always return to the firm base for 
Rand R and to draw more rations before starting out again. 
And if, at any time they were compromised_ they could simply take off. moving 
fairly fast, anti-tracking back to the relative safety of the base. 
Rich sought out the officer who kept a store full of kit for special jobs. Hewanted an 
extremely powerful telescope and a really good pair of binoculars. 
He decided to take along a new territorial captain. known as Jungle Jordan. Jordan had passed selection, but had not yet got his SAS colours. as he still had to prove himself on operations. The Vanduzi visit would be his first bush trip with the SAS. At the beginning of March. the six soldiers were choppered 14 kilometres (eight miles) from the Vanduzi main camp. The HQ clement set up their firm base on the summit of a high feature and Rich Stannard and Jungle Jordan set out for the 
camp, 
To keep their weight down. they had minimum rations and it took them morethan 
a week to ease through the thick grass in the surrounding woods before getting in 
close to the camp. 
They were now at the base of Monte Bossa mountain, and that night crept closer to 
the camp. They kept coming across bashas that were obviously in use, although 
unoccupied at the time. 
Suddenly, the two SAS men heard voices and laid low, hardly daring to breathe as 
the voices got louder. 
Then, out of the night loomed a group ofZANLA ~hey were carrying large pla~tic 
bags full of maize which were slung under ruopant poles. And they were gettmg nearer. It was time for the SAS to make tracks. 
Having passed a pile of rocks at the bottom of the mountain,. Rich. reasoned they 
~ould use them to get up on to the mountain. They had .be~n briefed It woul? be .too Inaccessible for foot soldiers. but Rich felt that with their hght packs they might Just 
	make it 	' 
255 


Quickly they skirted hack around the mountain. scrambled over the rocks and were soon leaving the unsuspecting enemy far behind. 
The vegetation was difficult underfoot with clumps of bamboo and vines slowing down their progress. It was a tortuous journey. 
Occasionally. they took a breather and looked back through their nightscopes. 

ZANLA were still at the foot of the mountain and their numbers seemed to he swelling. 

It was a devil of a climb. hut the two men persevered and pushed on. By the time they reached the top, the sun was just corning up and they could see their long night's haul had not been in vain. 
They had arrived in a magnificent position; had a bird's eye view of the ZANLA camp far below and could see the roads leading to and from the camp. 

With the aid of their powerful telescope. the two men on the mountain could see 15 kilometres across the countryside into Chimoio town and into the FRELIMO tank training ground. Rich even spied the Windmill Restaurant where he had once enjoyed a meal in the last days of Portuguese rule. (He had been in Chimoio [then Vila Pery] in an undercover role to observe FRELIMO as they carne in from the bush in the wake of the Lisbon coup). 

The area he neath them was thickly treed, hut they could monitor the movements far below without the enemy having the slightest idea they were' in the area. 

No sooner had the two weary men flung their packs down than they heard a commotion far helow. Rich reached for his binoculars once more 10 see a group of ZANLA walking in single file, carrying hlankets and lillie yellow plastic water containers from the river to their day base under the trees. 

From their lofty perch. the two SAS men counted 250 ZANLA., six of them women. 

They sported an assortment of dress, from a combination of khaki trousers and civilian shirts, to complete civilian outfits, light green FRELIMO uniforms with matching com hat caps and even an assortment of old Portuguese camouflage. The women were smartly turned out in green T-sbirts. trousers and veldskoens. and each woman wore chest webbing 
Everyone's kit was freshly laundered with creases ironed in shirts and trousers. 

Most carried AKs or SKSs and there were a few RPDs 10 be seen. 

Rich zeroed in on one commander's expensive-looking watch and was most impressed. You couldn't even get watches like that in Rhodesia. And yet here was a terrorist running around the hush with one. 

There were six populated areas altogether and it SUddenly struck the two SAS men that instead ofheing on thtjringes or the camp as they had thought they had walked right into the centre of it. Still. no one knew that they were there. so there was no need (0 worry. 

At 05h30. they saw fires in three of the six areas. Thirty minutes later the 250 ZANLA spread allover the camp got together. bringing along their maize, yellow water containers and pads. They were noisy lind the two Rhodesians heard plenty of laughing and shouting. 

But at O9hOO all fell quiet ZANLA went to ground in their day base, taking their blankets with them. 

Occasionally. two Toyota Landcruisers would move around the camp. The driver of u green Land-Rover turned out to he none other than ZAN LA commander General Josiah Tongogara. who would normally park his vehicle under a tree out of view of Rhodesian war planes. 

256 


257 
bz
:'-t night the camp came to life again. The sounds of singing. laughing and chatting drifted up to the men maintaining their lonely vigil far above. ZANLA sang their Chimurenga songs as they relaxed around blazinglires. safe in the knowledge - or so they thought _ that the Rhodesians were unaware of their new camp. 
Rich concluded that the countryside and the camp seemed a fairly pleasant place to be and it was no wonder that ZANLA morale was high. He relayed all his intelligence back to Rhodesia and asked for a camp attack. 
1f stop groups were dropped oIT at the day and night bases and the stores area. he 
felt the)' would account for most of the 300-400 occupants. 
With the two SAS men on top of the mountain keeping watch. the Rhodesians 
would. in addition to the element of surprise. have a magnificient advantage and be in a very strong position to outwit the enemy. They would be able to direct ground troops ... tell them where ZANLA were ... tell if the enemy was closing in on them ... 
Being so close to Chimoio town. FRELlMO would undoubtedly be swift to react and send troops to the camp. but Rich would be in an excellent position to warn of approaching armour, enabling the necessary action to be taken. 
But the plan was not to be. With thousands of enemy inside Rhodesia and every security force unit working internally crying out for fireforce actions. they were killing too many inside the country to worry about those outside at this stage. 
Then: were other voices in the security forces however, who viewed it from another angle. They felt it was far better to take on the enemy in their external bases before 
they infiltrated. 
But a large-scale camp attack with the full back-up of a forward assembly point- 
fuel area, casevac set up _ would have called for considerable planning. And to commit aircraft to an external camp attack would mean withdrawing them from internal operations where they were desperately needed. Rhodesia simply did not 
have sufficient aircraft to do everything. 
Much to the dismay of Rich and Jungle Jordan. who could see the vulnerability of 
the ZANLA below them, the national planners decided against using troops to attack 
the camp. 
They settled instead on a Hunter strike. a Canberra bombing run followed up by 
Gears and x-cars and fixed-wing aircraft 
At firstlight on March 17, Rich and Jungle Jordan were up and waiting and were so 
high. they could see right down on top of the Rhodesian planes as they swept in for 
the kill. 
Two Hunters screamed in angrily. dropping their bombs and rockets in among the 
thick trees covering ZANLA at their night base. There was only one enemy up an? 
	about that morning 	and he stood mesmerised by the planes and their 
	descending cargoes. 	. 
Branches shredded and cracked off and massive explosions tore apart the still- 
	sleeping camp. 	. 
John and Janet, the tame baboon early-warning sentries. were caught napping too 
for the element of surprise was absolute. 
Then. after the initial explosions. the rudelyawakened ZANLA were up and 
	running. Everywhere there was pandemonium. 	. 	. 
The Canberras came in. then the G-cars .. , K-cars ... the fixed-Wing ':'Ilreraft. 
As the choppers came around a corner, the pilots were ~aken completely unawares as a 14,5 millimetre and two 12) millimetre heavy m3chlOeguns and small arms fire 
opened up on them, 


With fire now coming from areas they had been unaware of it was becoming dangerously clearto the two SAS observers that they had been watching only a small portion of the camp. Instead of there heing300 or so ZANLA down there. there were probably more like one thousand. most blotted from view by the thick springy tree tops. Thus the two men on the mountai n were totally surrounded by them. It was big odds. even for the SAS. 

Then one of the fixed-wing aircraft took a hit and had to turn back to Rhodesia. 
The two SAS men watched as the planes. their strikes over. returned to base in readiness for another visit to Vanduzi later that day. But the cloud base was too low over the camp and the plan had to be scrapped. 

During the day, ten FREUMO moved into the camp in a Russian Gaz truck. and three hours later it pulled out laden with ZANLA and FRELIMO. 
Next morning. the SAS men watched as FRELIMO cautiously approached the camp. This time they came in an armoured personnel carrier-which was followed by a Russian truck. There were infantry armed with AKs on either side of the vehicles and they were searching for landmines the Rhodesian might have left lying in wait for them. 

It was an opportunity not to be missed; and Rich Stannard once again called for the Hunters. 

While the jets were on their long journey from the border. thirty wounded enemy were loaded on to the truck and ferried to a holding position. 
Eventually. the two Hunters swept in. This time they were aiming for the FRELIMO armoured personnel carrier and truck parked under cover of the trees. But the enemy had deployed a two-man Strela team to the top of a little rise which formed the lowest part of the mountain and as the first Hunter completed its strike and was moving up and out. a missile homed in on it and raced through the air. 
The pilot in the mutually-supporting second Hunter saw the danger and screamed a warning. It was instantly heeded ... and the first Hunter headed into the sun and managed to avoid being hit by the deadly heat-seeking missile. 
Then the two Hunters returned to givetheStrela team a taste of their own medicine ... and as the Rhodesians struck. the two enemy leaped over their hill and doubled away to the safety of the thick bush. 

The Hunters then eliminated the personnel carrier and some of the ground troops. 

   

That night. a Rhodesian pilot sneaked over the mountain to drop offa resupply of batteries and rations to the two men to enable them to maintain their vigil for a few more days. With pinpoint accuracy, their provisions landed just a few metres from them. 
The two SAS men hurried forward to break open the packages. They had heen living on the minimum possible rations for two weeks and the resupply was badly needed. As always, the SAS caterers had done them proud and they were soon tucking into a tasty feast of still-warm sausages and juicy steaks. 
Later squadron commander Martin Pearse. back in the firm base. came on the radio to warn that the radio intercepts had learned that FRELIMO. having guessed there were Rhodesian observers somewhere in the area. were being deployed to search for them. 

258 


259 
It was time to get going ... and the two men spent the whole nightc1imbing down their mountain ... and with each step he took Rich was getting more and more disgruntled with the way things had turned out 
First he had wanted ground troops and that had been denied. Had he got his way, he knew they would have accounted for hundreds of enemy. Then, they had been told to pull out before he could direct another air strike on the camp ... which by now was 
already being evacuated. 
As they moved around the bottom of their mountain, the sun was already up. Rich 
now decided that as there was no chance of putting in another strike, they might as well pullout of the area straight away ... and contrary to the principles ofSAS modus operandi he decided to move out during the day. 
Off they went, hugging the side of the mountain until they came to a track. They checked out the spoor, saw some blood-stained bandages, then sk.irted around for a couple of kilometres to get back on to the road. 
Rich couldn't resist the temptation to look back down the road, and as he did so. he saw two ZANLA armed with an RPD watching them. For a moment nothing 
happened. Neither group made a move. 
The SAS men were blackened-up and were so filthy from the long night's march 
through the long grass, the vines. and from clambering all over the rocks. that they must have resem bled comrades themselves. 
It had to be the only possible explanation why ZANLA had not already killed them. It was only when Rich andJungleJordan began whispering to each other, that 
the enemy became suspicious and brought forward their RPD. 
Suddenly. the rounds were raining all over the place. Trees were being hit, sending showers of kindling splintering into the air. The very grass was bending as the rounds 
whistled past 
The two RHodesians fled. Then Jungle Jordan took a hit below the knee and assur- 
ing Rich he was all right, he took off again. skirmishing backwards. with Rich trying 
to keep up with him. 
There was just savannah vegetation all around and no cover anywhere. ZANLA 
were still putting long down bursts of fire. There was nowhere to hide; no opportunity to fire back ... they just had to keep running in the direction of the firm base. 
As he ran, Rich had a single thoughton his mind- "Today I'm going to die. There's 
no ways we are going to get out of this." 
There was enemy spoor all over the place and it was obvious t~e original two 
enemy had been joined by their comrades and the SAS me.n wer~ belOgsurrounded. There was only one option left As he ran. Rich grabbed his radio handset an~ ~ave the current code word for hot extraction He didn't know how many enemy had JOined . in the chase. but there were human tracks everywhere and he wasn't prepared to take 
any chances. 
They were still heading towards their finn base, and from time to time, Rich helped 
	his injured colleague along. 	. 
Two hours later. ZANLA were still in hot pursuit behind them. Then three kilo- 
metres from the firm base. they heard the sounds ora chopper approaching. Saved at 
	last! Or were they'! 	. 
Soon the chopper was hovering above them. The pilot lo~ered ~he hot extractIOn 
bar. They clambered on. clipped their harnesses on to the nng, RIch turned to the pilot and gave the thumbs up sign. signalling they were ready to be whisked to 
safety. 


The chopper lifted. but almost immediately began to lose power and for one worry' ing moment Rich and Jungle Jordan. snatched from certain death. thought they were about to return to hostile countryside. 
But the pilot hovered and moved forward and the two men swinging on the ~ar below were dragged right through the treetops. When they emerged at the other SIde all their kit had been ripped from them and their clothes were hanging in tatters. But they were alive. and as they new home to safety. they marvelled at their good fortune. 

Both men knew that things might have turned out very differently had Jungle Jordan's injury been more serious. 
As far as Rich Stannard was concerned. his two-man concept. using light packs. enabling them to move far and fast. had worked. Things might not have worked oul so well had ZANLA been pursuing four heavily kitted-up people. However. Rich was the first to concede that the two-man callsign would have been more successful had they nOI moved out during the day. 
Rich and Jungle Jordan who had been outnumbered 1000 to two throughout the mission and had successfully directed the war planes on 10 the camp. were later honoured for their bravery. 

Rich was awarded the Bronze Cross of Rhodesia and Jungle Jordan received a Military Forces Commendation (Operational). 
II was ruled that Jungle Jordan, surrounded by terrorists. wounded. hunted and h~t extracted as he had been. had proved himself operationally and he was awarded his SAS colou rs. 
Subsequent intelligence revealed that Tongogara had been injured in the .leg during the first airstrike.1t was the closest the Rhodesians were tocome to ellminaunf him. 

 

Two months later. Rich and another operator were beckon the mountain directing the jetson to another 150 enemy camped below. When the survivors began to pull out he called for another strike. which left the entire area and the buildings flattened. 

The mission had been a success and Rich was delighted the two-man concept had worked better the second time around. 

