Operation Uric, September 5-8, 1979

"If you want to make peace, you don't talk to your friendx You talk to your enemiex"
-
GENERAL MOSHE DAYaN

Despite the success of the one-man-one-vote elections, which had brought moderate Bishop Abel Muzorewa to power, and the positive response by European and American opinion, there was still no official recognition of the new order from Britain or anywhere else.
The Rhodesians, who had long felt that their salvation lay with the Tories rather than the Socialists, were to be proved horribly wrong.
When Margaret Thatcher won the British elections, Rhodesians were elated. Had not Lord Boyd and his team already pronounced the Rhodesian April elections free and fair?. Surely recognition had to follow?.
Yet, even before the Tories went on to win their own election, Lord Peter Carrington, destined to play an important role in Rhodesia's history, was saying: "...
if you are going to bring Rhodesia back to legality, it will be necessary to get the support and agreement of the international community."
The main stumbling block preventing Britain from recognising the Muzorewa Government appeared to be the Commonwealth members of the OAU. But the British premier hoped to convince them to recognise Muzorewa at the Commonwealth prime ministers' conference in Lusaka in August.
But when August came around, attitudes among many Commonwealth countries had hardened and member countries were divided between those willing to recognise the Muzorewa administration and those which were not.
Such was the intensity of the debate that it even threatened the break-up of the Commonwealth itself.
Britain finally resolved the matter by advocating an all-party conference on the Rhodesian issue. What, Rhodesians wanted to know, of all those pledges to recognise the first black prime minister elected by 64 percent of Rhodesians? Why had the Tories reneged on their pre-election promises?
The simple truth was that the west was not prepared to recognise the internal agreement in the face of such opposition from the OAU and the front line states, which recognised the PF as the only "authentic and legitimate representatives of the people of Zimbabwe."
Despite all the pledges of support, Britain also had the very real matter of British interests to consider.
British exports to black Africa were worth £2 000 million a year and half of them went to oil-rich Nigeria. On the eve of the Lusaka summit the Lagos government announced it was nationalising the entire remaining assets of British Petroleum.
The seizure of more than six billion US dollars worth of BP's operation was stimulated by an attempt to force Britain not to sell oil to Rhodesia and South Africa.
Further, Nigeria threatened to cut off the billions of US dollars worth ofgoods and services bought every year from Britain, if Muzorewa's government was treated as legitimate.
It was the big squeeze. And the point was taken.
327

After much frantic effort by the British premier, the Australian Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser, and others attending the Commonwealth conference the details for a Rhodesian settlement were finalised. Others ironed out differences among the various delegates. Eventually, everyone in Lusaka agreed there was to be an all-party conference at Lancaster House, London.
The British were to draw up a new constitution, and after an all-party agreement and ceasefire had been negotiated, they would supervise new elections monitored by Commonwealth observers.
If Rhodesians felt incensed and in a no-win situation, it was no wonder. The Herald asked if Mrs Thatcher was "'really a Labour Prime Minister in drag" and Tory MP Julian Amery commented that the agreement to hold all-party talks was "a black day for Britain and the Conservative Party." He added: "~This will bring neither peace nor honour.'"
Deeply disturbed by the news of the all-party talks, Pik Botha, South Africa's Foreign Minister, voiced the sentiment shared by many Rhodesians: "'The Zimbabwe-Rhodesian settlement issue is beginning to look like a rugby match where the game is played until the winners lose.
However, the Salisbury government, although initially insulted by proposals for an all-party conference, failed to heed South African advice and reluctantly agreed to attend the talks.
The war had to be stopped once and for all and sanctions lifted. Apart from the tragic loss oflife, and mounting pressure from all sides, they were slowly running out of money and manpower. Perhaps the conference would provide the solution.
(Between the beginning of April and the end of July alone, 3 149 war deaths had been recorded within the country's borders. Ofthose, 1 808 were insurgents, 1 161 were black civilians and 31 were white, while security force losses stood at 141. There were no figures for those killed outside the borders.)
A few days later, the Patriotic Front, who had been equally reluctant to sit around a conference table, also agreed to go to London. Machei pointed out to Mugabe that they had not yet beaten the Rhodesians on the battlefield. It was time to negotiate.
The opening session of the marathon conference, destined to drag on for three tortuous months, was due to start on September 10. Back in Africa, meanwhile, the war raged on.

As the various delegations prepared for what was to be the final conference in the 14-year quest for a political solution, the security forces were planning to strengthen the Rhodesian's hand by mounting a major pre-emptive strike into Mozambique.
Operation Uric was to be the biggest offensive of the war, and it heralded the beginning of a new strategy.
During the initial stages ofexternal operations, specific orders had been given that the Rhodesians had no quarrel with the armies of Mozambique and Zambia.
Their fight was solely against ZANLA and ZIPRA forces who were using the neighbouring host countries as a springboard, and many an operation was cancelled where there was a sporting chance of getting involved with the armies of the host country and thus increasing the chances of escalation.
328

As the war progressed, however, intelligence produced indisputable evidence that both Zambia and Mozambique were openly assisting the ZIPRA/ZANLA war effort.
Initially, the host countries gave help secretly, but towards the end of the war, they provided intelligence, helped train recruits, supplied them with arms, ammunition and transport, assisted them carry out trans-border crossings, and helped with all logistical matters. And they allowed them to set up their headquarters in major towns and cities.
There were enemy base camps in Zambia and Mozambique where Rhodesian guerillas actually shared camp facilities including a common anti-air protection system and enemy armour. ZANLA and their FRELIMO friends and ZIPRA and their Zambian Army comrades were, in fact, one and the same.
Linked with the policy of non-aggression towards host countries, no action was allowed to be carried out against industrial or agricultural targets, strategic bridges, or any target within Zambia or Mozambique which the Rhodesian Intelligence Agency considered to be against the economy of the country.
There was considerable frustration in some military quarters when clearance was sought - and refused - for attacks on Mozambique's sugar crop or Zambia's copper mines or major bridges, thereby bringing the host countries to their knees and forcing them to boot out their nationalist guests. The possibility ofworld pressure was always a major consideration in the Rhodesian camp.
To the simple soldier, such a policy was inconceivable.
If the enemy were using the main host country trunk routes, why couldn't the Rhodesians destroy the bridges and prevent the easy flow of enemy logistics? If the terrorists were storing their arms and ammunition in host country barracks and armouries, why couldn't they attack them?
Every question of that nature was always fobbed off with the usual clichr: "'It's a political decision."
It took until the final year of the war before the high command and the politicians decided that in order to stop the hordes overrunning Rhodesia from four fronts simultaneously, they would have to attack host country economic targets and, where necessary, host country forces.
The flow of ZANLA into the south of the country through the Gaza Province - The Russian Front - had reached such grave proportions that the planning team at ComOps was finally able to convince the national JOC that the FRELIMO and insurgent lines of communication had to be drastically disrupted.
Of the 10 800 ZANLA in Rhodesia, some fifty percent were deployed through Gaza, and with another 17 000 trainees in the pipeline, one-third were earmarked for deployment into Rhodesia through the province. All had staged through Mapai, the FRELIMO 2 Brigade headquarters and controlling centre for ZANLA.
Until. the end of 1978, security force contacts with transit groups close to the border areas were frequent and kill rates were steady, if not spectacular.
Long-range SAS operations, supported when necessary by airstrikes and aimed at disrupting supplies by paralysing vehicle movement, had taken their toll of ZANLA arms and ammunition resupplies, effectively putting a brake on aggression in the Operation Repulse area.
Such was the strain on ZANLA logistics that ZANLA had been issued with obsolete Eastern Bloc rifles and even World War-2 Thompson sub-machineguns.
But since 1979, financial and manpower problems had brought changes.
329

The final phase in the cordon sanitaire minefield programme in the Gaza Province had been delayed, thereby aiding troublefree infiltrations. Small callsigns had lacked the firepower to either take on or inflict heavy casualties on enemy forces.
And on the few occasions when sizeable numbers had been on the ground, the isolated character oftheir deployments had enabled FRELIMO to determine quickly where they were assigned to and instigate follow-up operations.
The nature of the terrain in the south-east made life very difficult for the security forces and once their initial ambush had been mounted, they could not stay for long in the area without being chased. Everything was on FRELIMO's side.
Then in April, enemy incursions had taken on a new dimension.
The ZANI.A/FRELIMO co-operation was stronger than ever, and changes in modus operandi revealed the very real threat posed by the Gaza Province.
The first indication of the new approach came when a FRELIMO soldier was captured as far inland as Kezi in Matabeleland. Subsequent intelligence told that there were more than 200 FRELIMO regulars operating inside Rhodesia alongside their ZANLA comrades and they had radio communications back to Mapai. Before deploying, they had undergone a two-month guerilla warfare updating course, covering bushcraft, weapon handling and sabotage.
They were heading for Bulawayo and their tasks were to blow up the railway lines, lay landmines and engage the enemy. Their deployment- albeit under duress - was for a three month stint and they were to be paid only on their return to Mozambique.
Another 1 000 FRELIMO were in the pipeline for deployment through the Gaza Province. The aim of the joint ZANLA/FRELIMO groups was simple: to hasten the end of the war.
Most worrying for the Rhodesians was that the country's economic lines of communication to the south - the rail links to the South African border and over which the majority of the country's emergency fuel supplies travelled - were under threat. If one particular bridge had been destroyed, it would have been irreparable.
A joint political-military decision had been taken by President Samora Machel and FRELIMO commander General Sabastian Mabote, in consultation with Robert Mugabe, which not only included the deployment of FRELIMO troops alongside ZANLA into Rhodesia, but also involved the complete integration of FRELIMO and ZANLA forces in Gaza.
FRELIMO also took over command and control of ZANLA and resumed responsibility for their logistics and protection in Gaza.
Clearly, something drastic had to be done to stem the rate and scale of ZANLA infiltrations.., pre-empt the threat of combined ZANLA/FRELIMO incursions...
take the pressure off the country's economic lines of communication with South Africa ... and halt the free movement and passage of war materials to the war front.
The time had come to kick the enemy off the doorstep, take the pressure offRepulse and Tangent operational areas and redirect the enemy flow to an area where the security forces could combat it.
Operation Uric was conceived to do just that. Now that the country had a black Prime Minister, itwas hoped there would not be such a hue and cry from critics about such aggression.
The aim of the mission was to smash the road and rail communications.., flatten the Mapai forward base, which was go vital to both FRELIMO and ZANLA... and force FRELIMO to abandon the border areas by pushing them below Barragem.
330

After that, if any ZANLA or FRELIMO wanted to infiltrate into Rhodesia, they would face a very long and difficult walk through areas where there was little water.
FRELIMO and ZANLA lines of communication were to be disrupted by the demolition of five tactical bridges - the most important phase of the operation. Preemptive strikes were also to be mounted on selected enemy targets and ZANLA/ FRELIMO bases.
Thereafter, ambushes, aerial attacks and an intensive mining programme would disrupt road and rail communications, and prevent orderly movement.
Command and control positions.., wheeled transport.., a logistics base at Mabalane... and telecommunications were also to be hit, including a Troposcatter communications centre.
If all went welL there would not be a single military bridge of strategic importance left in the Gaza Province.
Apart from slowing down the seepage into Rhodesia, it would also deliver a shattering blow to the Mozambican economy.
The most important demolition task was to be the Aldeia da Barragem irrigation canal and the road and rail bridges over the dam feeding the irrigation scheme for the whole area. Four lesser bridges would also be dropped.
Pre-emptive air strikes were to be made on Barragem, Mapai and Maxaila, and helicopter-borne troops would then be dropped off for the exploitation of that phase.
By eliminating the Gaza lines of communication, bombing Mapai to break morale, and a long harassment programme around the base, the Rhodesians were hoping to take Mapai.
With the bridges destroyed, the roads mined, communications totally severed, water and supplies cut off, Mapai would have been in a very vulnerable position. The enemy would have had no option but to leave.
Then, once everyone had left, the security forces intended to move in with a small force and destroy whatever was left of MapaL
Mapai was a very heavily-defended forward base, and ComOps knew that to mount an attack would have needed a conventional force of two battalions, artillery and tanks.
An alternative had to be found and they were gambling that the long-term harassment coupled with the other phases of Uric would be the key to taking Mapai.
The operation would involve 360 men drawn from the SAS, the RLI and engineers, together with the air force, which was to deploy every available aircraft. These included, eight Hunters, twelve Dakotas, six Canberras, six Lynx aircraft and twentyeight helicopters, including the Bell 205s.
Initially, because of the on/off nature of the operation and last-minute political considerations, which were totally beyond the control of the planners, they ended up with what was to be their third plan.
As a result, the final plan was still not completed by 20h00 the night before the troops were to start moving to the various internal and external administrative bases.
D-Day was scheduled for 07h00 on Sunday, September 2, but on Saturday it was evident that the weather would not allow Uric to begin on time. The weather had clamped down at Chipinda Pools tactical headquarters and forward airfield and the choppers could not take off.
331

As more than two hundred men had already been deployed externally to the adminstrative area - the start point for the bridge attacks - the planners were immensely worried.
They were certain that security would be blown and the mission compromised.
What concerned them too was that if the troops in the admin area inside Mozambique got into trouble, there could be no air support to assist them or helicopters to extract them. They were a good 200 kilometres (I 24 miles) from the border- one ofthe furthest admin areas set up in the war.
The deployment of so many aircraft at the various forward airfields along the border also caused grave concern and the planners were worried that civilian Viscount passengers arriving at Buffalo Range (one of the forward airfields) would pick up the additional air movement.
To add to their worries, the lowveld locals gave the planners the sad news that when low cloud and drizzle came in, it could be expected to last for three days.
From the start of the operation, things went wrong.
At the initial briefing, the troops were told that the external administrative area would be on an island in the middle of a large swamp. "~Don't worry," they were told, "no one will be able to get at you over that swamp."
When they got there, they found that the "swamp" was as dry as a bone and that a division of tanks could have crossed.
During the long wait for the weather to clear, the planners back in Rhodesia were continually getting reports that FRELIMO columns were searching for the Rhodesians. One FRELIMO platoon, however, did its best to avoid the Rhodesians" position but failed. It says much for the camouflage of the admin area and little for the enemy platoon commanders" navigation that the platoon walked straight on to the position.
By now, the cloud base had lifted and the choppers were on their way to collect the troops for the start of Operation Uric and the bridge-blowing phase.
Quickly, SAS Quartermaster Major Paul Simmonds radioed base and told them to hold the choppers. Eventually, the FRELIMO platoon walked to within one hundred metres of the position and were still heading towards it. The RLI sub-unit covering that part ofthe perimeter opened fire and after a briefexchange of fire, twenty-two out of twenty-four FRELIMO were killed. One was wounded and the other managed to escape.
RLI Major Pete Farndell was injured and subsequently casevacked. He was not to know it then, but that incident was to save his life.
The frightening thing about the encounter was that the admin area had been located, lfthe security forces could not hold the position, they could not continue with the operation.
They had dropped off hundreds of drums of fuel, and a vast quantity oflandmines and explosives, so they could not abandon the position either.
It was now September 5, and at last the mission was about to begin. The delay had seriously affected their original time appreciations and various adjustments were made in the planning.
The air strike on Barragem, 320 kilometres (200 miles) inside Mozambique and 150 kilometres (93 miles) north-west of the capital Maputo, took place exactly on time.
Four Hunter jets swept down the fertile Limpopo Valley to attack the enemy defensive positions holding the road and rail irrigation canal bridge, the most important bridges in the south-east, feeding the irrigation for the entire area.
332

All aircraft were subjected to anti-air fire, but the jets scored a number of direct hits on weapons, destroyed two barrack blocks and all transport
Exactly five minutes later, 48 SAS helicopter-borne troops were dropped within one kilometre of Barragem road and rail bridges. The choppers lifted immediately for the safety of a holding area.
A number of heavy enemy machineguns were still in action after they had landed.
but the fight through the Barragem defences was fairly rapid.
The SAS were fortunately able to capture two enemy 23 millimetre anti-aircraft guns one of which they were able to use to great effect in the ground role against enemy pockets of resistance on both banks of the fiver, thereby reducing the pressure on the SAS.
During this action, one of the men was shot in the leg and an immediate casevac called for.
In the confusion and heat of the battle, a communications error was made and the helicopter flew over the main enemy position.., and as the Bell came into the landing zone, an enemy RPG-7 rocket launcher was fired while the aircraft was still hovering, The rocket struck the helicopter just below the blades, severing the main rotors. The Bell plummetted to earth and almost instantly burst into flames.
Technician Alexander Wesson was killed on impact, and the pilotwas pulled from the flaming wreck by an extremely brave SAS Sergeant Flash Smythe. This action desen'ed recognition, and but for an administrative blunder at the end of the war, Flash would have received the BCR for this and other heroic deeds.
The pilot suffered a broken elbow, lacerations and shock, but thanks to the efforts of the quick-thinking sergeant, he was lucky enough to escape death. The helicopter was burnt to the ground - a terrible waste of life and a vital aircraft.
Meanwhile, the demolition teams were busying themselves setting up their charges on the two Barragem bridges. They had an elaborate system of ropes and pulleys worked out for the team to get under the bridge spans and were literally getting stuck in with Wonder Glue when the man on the captured 23 millimetre gun opened up.
Suddenly, rounds were cracking over their heads breaking the sound barrier. Split seconds later, the delayed sounds of the guns being fired reached them. Then came the deafening din as the rounds exploded in the distance.
"'When you hear all that without being warned and you happen to be dangling on a precarious stamp-size platform ten metres from the concrete and endeavouring to place 20 kilogram satchel charges at the same time, it's not conducive to either balance or steady heartbeat!" explained Lance Corporal Andrew Standish-White.
Fortunately, he was glued to the platform at that stage, so he remained suspended.
It took about five hours to prepare the bridge for demolition, and at one stage it was touch and go as to whether there would be enough light to extract the troops that night.
Preparations on the other four bridges were unopposed, and by 16h30, the demolition job was completed.
An RLI-Engineer callsign under former SAS man Joey Du Plooy had a good morning at one of the targets. They had swept through the nearby town, taken it over, sprayed thirty vehicles with rounds, drained a fuel bowser and blown up two power stations. Then Engineer Captain Charlie Small blew the bridge.
All bridges with the exception of Barragem had been totally destroyed and the rail link severed.
333

Unfortunately, because of the time factor, the SAS men were extracted without physically checking on the damage at their Barragem target. While the rail line was cut, it later transpired that the road bridge had not been completely destroyed and light vehicles were still able to use it
Their extraction had been premature and, according to some planners, more explosives should have been carded in the following morning and the job done properly. Although the SAS had the detailed plans of the bridge, they found that the engineers who had built it had put far more reinforcing into the bridge than the plans indicate& As a result, the SAS did not have enough charges with them to destroy it alL
The main Gaza supply route was, therefore, still open and the attack on Barragem had been of nuisance value only. It had served only to slow things down as opposed to curing the communications link.
By last light on D-Day, all the troops had been extracted from their tasks and were back in the admin area. One hundred and twenty SAS men and 72 RLI troops were nowto go on to Mapai, the heavily-defended FRELIMO 2 Brigade headquarters and ZANLA command centre.
The initial plan for Mapai had been the long harassment by the air force, with large ambush groups totally ringing Mapai on all three major access routes. After FRELIMO/ZANLA morale had broken and the enemy had fled, the idea was that ground troops move in to Mapai and destroy whatever was left of it But for a number of reasons, some to do with the weather, some political, and some' involving other reasons which are still controversial in many circles, the concept was changed and instead of harassing Mapai with large ambush groups, a decision was made that ground troops should attack Mapai, after the bombing and before the enemy had left.
All FRELIMO bases in the province had already been put on alert about the bridge demolitions, but in Mapai, although the A/A gunners took up their positions, no undue alarm was caused by the warning
Next day, a complete air of nonchalance existed in the enemy complex with no thought of an attack in anybody's mind. Some units were on muster parade, others were washing and having their breakfast. Others were still in bed, while the nine Russian advisers busied themselves checking the camp routine.
Thirty minutes later, 500 and l 000 pound bombs, and golf bombs were raining from the skies as the Rhodesian planes swept over Mapai.
The FRELIMO command element area and communications centre were demolished, and the Russian's bunker collapsed from a direct hit. Lucky to be alive.
the Russians quickly pulled out of Mapai.
Scores of tents went up in smoke, a small armoury exploded, 22 FRELIMO were killed and 32 wounded. All the uninjured hurdedly took up their defensiv¢::il positions.                                                            :i Thirty minutes later, however, the general feeling was that it was all over.    ~-~ Then, the Rhodesian jets struck again, blowing up the main fuel dump with itsi~::i~ underground storage tank. The main radar station was knocked out, one A/A po~,i~(i tion was destroyed and more people were wounded.
~i'i~ The Hawker Hunters were subjected to severe ground fire, but miraculo~!~ escaped without casualties.
The 192 helicopter-borne troops were meanwhile on their way to their pre-sel~~ dropping zones, one kilometre from Mapai.
334

Earlier, because there was not enough room in one of the choppers, a group of security forces had drawn straws to decide who should stay behind. Corporal Ronnie Bell drew the short straw, and watched as the others climbed into the chopper.
Then the commander, Joey du Plooy, who had taken injured Pete Farndell's place on the operation, told Gavin Hulley-Miller to change places with someonein another chopper.
Before Operation Uric. the security forces had rarely had to contend with an enemy who was prepared to stay and fight. The only opposition on previous large-scale camp attacks came from a trapped enemy who had no alternative other than to fight it out. For it was always the enemy's tactic to disperse the moment an aircraft was heard.
Not this time.
As one unfortunate pilot of the chopper bearing Joey du Plooy and team and their explosives, flew directly over a satellite camp, miles from the main target, the enemy opened up.
There were two distinctive bangs as what was probably an RPG-7 rocket struck the aircraft immediately behind the pilot. The chopper rolled to the fight and crashed into the ground. The occupants never stood a chance as the helicopter went in. It exploded in a ball of flame on impact, killing everyone on board.
It was the worst single military disaster of the war. Killed were the commander, South African born Joey du Plooy, Captain Charlie Small, the Operation Uric demolitions officer, well-known national rugby star Cpl LeRoy Duberly, 2nd Lt Bruce Burns, Cpi Hugh Fry, L/Cpl Peter Fox, Tpr Jacobus Briel, Tpr Brian Eslin, Australians Tpr Stephen King and Tpr David Prosser, and Sgt Michael Jones from England.
When the corporal who had drawn the short straw heard what had happened, he went back to the landing zone in the admin area to search for the straw that had saved his life.
He couldn't find it, but really needed no reminder of how lucky he had been.
Neither did Pete Farndell and Gavin Hulley-Miller, brother of SAS/SB liaison officer, Stu Hulley-Miller. Stu had seen Gavin climb into the chopper but had not seen him get out, and for the remainder of the operation, he was convinced his brother had perished in the crash.
When an RLI callsign went in to inspect the crash site, they confirmed everyone was dead and it was impossible to bring out the remains.
As a result of the helicopter casualties, a number of operational adjustments were made to the plan.
The bulk of the SAS/RLI troops were however dropped in their correct landing zones. As the sweeplines closed with the main enemy position, it was very obvious that Operation Uric was not going to be a cakewalk.
Many ofthe old hands who had seen a lot of action agreed that they had never been subjected to such intense enemy smallarms, recoilless rifle and mortar fire.
The terrain was dead fiat, the vegetation consisted mainly of thick jesse bush, and the soil was sandy loam. It made command and control extremely difficult. The temperature must have been in the nineties which made fighting a hot. thirsty business.
Jet strike after jet strike was called for, and due to Rhodesia's limited resources there was a three-hour turn-around gap where aircraft had to return to New Sarum or Thornhill to refuel and rearm.
335

RHODESIA

b ffalo I~mlle - forward airfieM J Pools- Internal I [ Administrative Base    j

RHODESIA

Halputo

Intensive fitbtiq Jan

Extenud/Ulm~str~he Ih~. Tlu$ is located by Frelimo wko lose 2..t me,. im emmiq f~lk!

I Hdk'olR~r downed. All [ I aboard killed

REPUBLIC oF ",.
SOUTH AFRICA x,~ I i
Bridse damssed A A defem:es amd destroguJ HelteolHer downed - :l killul

SWAZILAND I.
I
!
j
°"'eel• ~'o m'e1 I

MOZAMBIQUE

Bridllcs destro~l J

Ckibuto

km 0    25    so '    mi~
'
Major rNd links Railwa~ line ~ "    Air $1rikes Lamlmim,~ hml oa major totals

Operation Uric: Map showing major security force offensive into Gaza Province, Mozambique
336

The security forces were almost helpless during the period when all the aircraft returned to base. Rhodesia simply did not have the air support to provide a cab-rank facility over the targeL
On their approach to Mapai, the SAS had discovered a series of early-warning stations built on platforms in the trees and connected by landline to the FRELIMO central command post in Mapai. It was a fascinating find and explained how FRELIMO had been able to monitor Rhodesian helicopter movements so accurately and for so long.
The SAS ended up against a two kilometre maze of typically Russian designed interconnecting zig-zag trench works, which put the attackers in an extremely difficult situation.
No sooner had they cleared one area than the enemy would pop up behind them.
Meanwhile, the jets continued to put in strike after strike and the ground troops couldn't quite believe the amount of fire being directed at the aircrafL There were 37 millimetre and 23 millimetre guns, and there had to be about twenty of them spread over half a kilometre.
The Canberras were forced to do a restrike from 21 000 feet` as it was unsafe to go any lower. And as they flew over MapaL every one of the twenty heavy weapons, opened up on them.
The Rhodesian ground troops had problems of their own and were having 122 millimetre rockets and heavy mortars fired at them. The enemy anti-aircraft fire was equally effective in the ground role, too. Some said they could hear the secondary weapon on a tank firing, although later intelligence was that there were no tanks in Mapai at the time.
In any event, the heaviest support weapons the ground troops had were 60 millimetre mortars, which were no match for the heavy weaponry they were encountering.
The Rhodesians" attack was a very light infantry assault against a large welldefended conventional position, which would have been no problem had most of the enemy left, as had been anticipated. Except in this case, they had noL Progress was extremely slow and it was soon evident that Mapai could only be taken with very heavy security force casualties.
The position was far better defended than they had imagined.., the Rhodesians were ill-equipped.., and it appeared pointless to continue.
Visibility in some cases was restricted to about ten metres and contacts were taking place at point blank range.
For the first time in the history of the war, the Rhodesians had been stopped dead in their tracks.
General Walls was airborne in the command Dakota and after a discussion with senior officers, he took the unenviable decision to withdraw from Mapai without physically taking the position.
Controversy still rages about whether or not the attack could have been pressed home and Mapai taken.
According to a captured FRELIMO man who was in Mapai at the time of the attack, it subsequently became general knowledge in the area that had the Rhodesians remained in Mapai for another two days, Mapai would have been taken as FRELIMO had very little food or water and were exceptionally tired.
The SAS were prepared to stick it out in the trenches, but had the unit lost thirty or so men, it would have had a dramatic effect on Rhodesia's counter-insurgency operations.
337

While the enemy had no manpower shortages, the security forces certainly had.
In view of all the enemy ground fire, the choppers could not return to uplift the 200odd troops manning ambush positions and sweeplines around Mapai and they were faced with a ten kilometre (six mile ) walk to a pick-up point.
The Rhodesians simply could not afford to lose another precious helicopter and more men.
A long straggly line of soldiers set off for the pick-up point and it became a race against time to get them all back to Rhodesia before dare By late afternoon, the helicopters had arrived to begin picking up the weary disappointed troops.
The long line of choppers skimmed the treetops and made their way homewards through the dusk
The entire area appeared to be teeming with enemy and the helicopters were subjected to ground fire throughout their flight, coming under heavy fire as they overflew a FRELIMO Mobile column. It was a most frightening exercise for passengers and crews alike. Eventually, all the troops were returned to the admin area.
Fortunately, the air strike schedule had gone almost to plan. During the two-day period, air strikes were put in on 14 enemy strongholds in Gaza. Much damage was caused including the destruction of the telecommunications and radar links at Malvernia. It was a truly magnificent effort by The Blues.
The mining programme had gone fairly well, despite adjustments having to be made, and by D-Day plus two, most of the roads had been mined and enemy transport had begun to hit the landmines.
As a result of withdrawing from Mapai and because of the increasing anxiety over the admin area being located, it was decided to terminate Uric.
In analysing the operation, the Rhodesians learnt many lessons.
They had underestimated the enemy. They were outgunned by enemy support weapons. Their air support was almost ineffectual against enemy troops, dug in with overhead cover. With Rhodesia's limited resources, they were virtually helpless when the aircraft returned to base to re-arm and refuel.
The weather had been against them but that had just been bad luck In view of political considerations, the plans were changed too often at the last minute and as a result, the end plan was too rushed and not as thorough as it should have been.
They had not stuck to their original aim of disrupting the Gaza lines of communications. It had been changed to that of destroying Mapai. The destruction of the bridges almost became secondary, and they did not go back to finish offthe Barragem bridge demolition.
There was much heated argument and harsh words behind closed doors at ComOps among several personalities as to where the responsibility lay for getting the planners to change their aim. One man denied the aim had been changed. The matter was never resolved and the controversy still rages. The author, therefore, can only give as accurate an account as possible after heating most views.
However, the anger .was nothing to that being felt across the border. The Mozambican economy had been dealt a serious blow and was reeling,
The attacks against the country's already shaky transport system had hit Mozambique where it hurt most- in the breadbasket. Even before the raids, food shortages and lack of transport were major problems. Now, the position was worse.
Gaza provided eighty percent ofthe nation's food. While the SAS did not break the dam at Aldeia da Barragem, they damaged one of the four sluice gates, which meant that 25 percent less water was available to irrigate the new rice crop.
338

For a country with a critical food shortage, it was a drastic blow. Yet had the ~ecurity forces succeeded it destroying Aldaia da Barragem bridge completely, the damage would have been catastrophic.
The blow to the economy only served as an urgent reminder to Machel of the desperate need for a peaceful settlement.
Meanwhile, in London, the final battle of words was about to begin ...