The End Of The Line, October 13, 1979

While Dave Dodson and his team were battling the current on the Chambeshi River, other SAS teams, intent on a similar mission in Mozambique, were completing their demolition trials and perfecting their bridge-blowing techniques.
Destined for the Tete Province, they planned to cut three bridges on the allimportant rail track which ran from the east coast up to the railhead at Moatize, Mozambique's largest coal mine.
With three Mozambican bridges destroyed, neighbouring Zambia would also be denied access to the east coast port of Beira, thereby increasing the pressure on Zambia to open the border with Rhodesia.
Not only that, but it had become far too risky of late for ZANLA to move men and arms by road to the Tete area, from where they would ultimately find their way into the Hurricane operational area and beyond. The main road northwards ran close to the Rhodesian border and anything travelling on it was extremely vulnerable to SAS and MNR ambushes.
The rail line was a much safer proposition altogether- or so they thought It had been ten months since Mac McIntosh and his team had destroyed the Mecito rail bridge - and the valuable train - on the track, and while the line had not yet been repaired, it was still in use.
FRELIMO were merely operating a shuttle service - moving one train up to the severed track, offloading goods and passengers and then transferring them to another train on the other side.
The damage had thus been an inconvenience only - and the Rhodesians had learned a very valuable lesson from FRELIMO's ingenuity.
Now the Rhodesians planned to extend the damage one downed bridge could do, by dumping three major bridges in a row, thereby putting an end to the bridges.., the track.., and FRELIMO's ability to run a shuttle service.
FRELIMO had already demonstrated that they were incapable of repairing one bridge. Three, hopefully, would take forever.
The three bridges earmarked for destruction were from the northerly one to the southerly bridge 100 kilometres (62 miles) apart. The mission was to see the introduction of unique demolition devices - one was a large nylon mesh demolition net to be strung under the decking of two of the bridges enabling the operators to attach explosives to the top of the abutments. The other devices were enormous custommade charges.
It was going to take six 100 kilogram charges of pentolite explosive to blow the incredibly thick piers at the northerly bridge - the biggest ofthe three targets - and the monster explosives had been cast into huge moulds ... 200-1itre fuel drums sliced down the centre which were then encased in nylon mesh.
The charges were to be hungon to the bridge by hooks set in wooden blocks which were to be attached to the p]~bs by the powerful Wonder Glue
The operators practised their demolition drills on a bridge on the outskirts of Salisbury.., lowering the demolition net under the bridge, pulling it up tight and clambering inside to spread out their charges, just as they would come the real thing.
Finally, all the rehearsals were over and demolition commander Lieutenant Pete Cole was satisfied that their timings were perfect; that every man knew his job; knew what to do in the event of someone being injured and the team having to be changed.
374

Their convoy moved off to Mtoko and only now were the troops told their specific targets. Pete Cole and his team were to get the biggest bridge in the north, Mike Rich was to be in charge of the centre demolition and Rich Stannard, the third. Two Dakotas were to drop the three demolition teams close to their respective targets just before last light The troops were to move in, secure the bridges, deal with any opposition, then carry out a reconnaissance.., and next morning, the Bells would bring in the explosives and the bridges would be blown in broad daylight
The weather was still hot and sunny when they took off for Mozambique. But as they climbed and turned away from Mtoko it became increasingly hazy, making visibility on the ground poor.
Not for Rhodesian Dakota pilots the sophisticated navigational aids of other air forces. They had to rely on their ability to map-read their way to a target, and that meant they had to see the ground clearly.
Eventually, the visibility became so bad that it was even difficult to see rivers and roads. The men in the Daks were straining their eyes to pick up features and stay on their correct flight path. The Number Two pilot even lost sight of the aircraft in front
Just as it was approaching drop time, they were forced to agree that they would have to abort There would be no drop that evening. The bridges would stand for another night
Luckily, there was no great urgency and as the sky in the distance turned a deep gold slashed with scarlet, the Dakotas turned and headed back to Rhodesia_ Next afternoon, the visibility was good and the mission on. The Dakotas flew high level and followed the same flight path as the normal scheduled commercial run from Salisbury to the Malawian capital.., a devious tactic to convince anyone below that they were on their way to Blantyr¢.
The SAS could see the lights of Blantyre 150 kilometres (93 miles) away. But at Matarara, they turned left and headed north into the fading light
Captain Colin Willis was to supervise the drop at the centre and northerly bridges from one Dakota: Pete Cole that at the southerly target from the second Dakota.
Twenty-five minutes from drop time, Pete popped through to the cargo bay to see the troops in his Dakota. They were sorting out their equipment and his wave was answered by a number of sickly grins.
Both aircraft located the rail line without any difficulty and turned in for the drop at the same time. They descended to 500 feet and even from the rather ponderous Dakotas, the ground below them seemed to rush past at a fast pace.
A few kraals flashed beneath them.., and as one Dakota approached the centre target, the pilot reached up to the button that controlled the dispatch lights above the exit door of the aircraft and held his hand them. Colin Willis standing behind him, could see the spot where he wanted the troops to be dropped off racing towards him and gave the pilot the usual thumbs-up sign.
The pilot pressed the red light button and both men knew that the troops would be standing in the door. Then the pilot pressed the green button and away they went There was no turning back for the SAS stick now. Soon, another demolition team would be dropped off at their bridge.
Meanwhile, the other Dakota was turning in to make its drop at the last bridge and the third party of bridge-blowers dropped in to their target As the Dakota continued on its flight path, Pete Cole, standing behind the pilot, managed to catch a glimpse of the bridge off to the starboard. It looked exactly as they had expected. Good, he thought It ought to be an easy one.
375

All three drops had gone well and the teams had reported landing safely near their targets. Both Dakotas turned for home, and soon Colin and Pete in their respective planes could see the two rows of landing lights burning ahead and guiding them into the airstrip at Mtoko.
They landed and climbed out into the darkness and were suddenly blasted by the wind from the engines and the noise as the two aircraft turned and took off again into the night. The SAS men hurried to the ops tent and were soon discussing the drop over a welcome cup of tea, and mulling over what was going to happen the following day.
Then they turned in for the night and must have mentally blown the three bridges at least six times before they fell asleep. All too soon, the guard was shaking them awake. Now it was time to go and blow them for real.
It was still dark, but there were already signs of dawn in the greying sky to the east.
They gathered up their rifles and equipment and went out on to the airstrip, stopping only at a bowser just long enough to splash water on their faces.
Pete headed for a Bell bearing the 600 kilograms of explosives to the northerly bridge; Colin, who was to remain airborne throughout the operation, made for a Lynx.

Across the border, the three SAS demolition teams were already moving into position.
At the northerly target, there was an exchange of fire with a couple of FRELIMO and the enemy ran off. The SAS got into extended line and advanced towards the bridge. There was another exchange with FRELIMO occupying bunkers near the bridge and again the enemy fled.
But the SAS did not pursue the matter this time. All they wanted was the bridge.
They fired a few mortar bombs near an African village just sixty metres from the bridge, merely to show the locals what was what, and to chase them away. The SAS were not blackened-up and it must have been obvious even to the most unsophisticated person, that such heavily armed white men were not friendly forces.
But the villagers accepted the situation and continued fetching and carrying their water from the riverbed regardless of the goings-on at the bridge.
Soon the three choppers had arrived at their respective targets to drop off their load of explosives.
Sergeant Small Bez was waiting to greet Pete Cole at the northerly bridge. The sergeant had it all buttoned up and told where he had positioned his troops to protect the demolition party while they fixed their charges.
Pete chalked a cross on the piers where he wanted the explosives attached and although he knew the 600 kilogram charges would rip the rail lines from the track, he was taking no chances. He sent a sergeant to set up separate charges to cut the rafts.
Eventually, the monster charges were attached to the bridge, the ringmain was run out and the track ready to be cut.
Everyone moved away to take cover and the six-man demolition team moved along the river and around a bend, hugging the high banks for protection.
Just then the Lynx pilot came up on the radio to tell them to delay the demolitionhe was bringing in Commander Colin Willis who wanted to get into a good position to see the fireworks.

Once the Lynx was circling safely in the distance, Pete and Small Bez lit the fuses and hurried to join the others around the bend in the river.
Then Pete gave the okay to blow the rails. There was a brief wait` then a massive explosion followed by some very speedy pieces of steel screaming overhead, cything their way through the thick bush. There was another short wait, then came an explosion twenty times bigger than the first
There she goes, they thought Everywhere there were smiling faces. Some of the men still had their hands pressed over their ears.
"LOOK UP!" some bellowed instinctively.
They all looked for the enormous pieces of concrete raining down from the skies, drenching the countryside and crashing all around them into the bush, followed a few seconds later by the patter of hundreds of smaller pieces.
Pete and Small Bez hurried back around the bend to see the damage. But all they could see was dust
"Ifs okay," Colin assured them from the orbiting Lynx "No need to worry; it's gone!"
And as the dust started to settle, they began to see that for themselves. Two piers and three spans were down, and the demolition team lost no time in congratulating each other.
Time was on their side and there was still the chance to use two reserve 48 kilogram charges to blow the abutments. They began to climb over the rubble, eager to get the bridge down as soon as possible.
Suddenly, the trooper up front, dropped his explosives and hurtled past the others at high speed.
"What's going on ... ?" Pete began to say, amazed at the strange turn of events.
Then he realised they were all being stung by thousands of angry bees, sent wild with frenzy by the shock wave of the explosion, which had blown away their nest under the bridge.
Soon, everyone was in hot pursuit of the first man and running as fast as he could away from the bridge.
They splashed in a nearby waterhole and furiously tried to beat the bees off one another. When that failed to work, they crawled under some low thorn bushes and covered their heads as best they could.
When it seemed as if the bees had finally had enough, the SAS gingerly emerged from the bushes to assess the damage- to themselves this time, not the bridge.
All six men in the demolition team had been stung, Two were in a very sorry state indeed and the medic immediately set about treating them.
Then they attempted approaching the bridge from all angles in a bid to blow out the abutments. But all they succeeded in doing was getting stung again.
They couldn't even get close enough to recover the first charge the trooper had dropped in the initial panic. They tried subduing the bees with smoke grenades and Lieutenant Angus Hyland-Smith even tried draping a mosquito net over his head to protect him as he tried to reach the charge.
But it was no use. The bees were painfully persistent As Pete Cole photographed what remained of the bridge, he couldn't help thinking how frustrating it was to be driven off by a swarm of bees.
Now time was running out The choppers would be coming for them soon and they would have to think of another plan.
377

They moved to a two-storey lookout post near the bridge and tried to destroy their charge with an RPG-7 rocket. They managed to damage the charge but not detonate it. However, the back-blast from the launcher blew the roof off the lookout post as an unexpected bonus.
Meanwhile at the other two bridges, everything had gone according to plan and both bridges were successfully demolished.
The three bridge-blowing parties met up again at a staging area inside Mozambique, rigged up all their unnecessary kit and unused charges for demolition, and, when the choppers lifted for home, they could see the dust as the explosion went off. But it was a small affair, a tiny puff compared to the earlier ones that day.
The two severely stung soldiers had to be admitted to hospital, and one was hospitalised for several days to recover from the wounds from the SAS's only attackers on the operation. The bees had proved to be far better fighters than either ZANLA or FRELIMO. They had fought the SAS time after time and did not give in, eventually forcing the Rhodesians to withdraw licking their wounds.
As for the SAS, they had now downed five bridges in two days. It would prove invaluable experience for the bigger stuff yet to come. For the bridge-blowing season was far from over.

