For ten years the SAS had been battling for the right to present its own special award to outstanding operational soldiers. 
It was an award which meant more to an SAS operator than any other, and it had its traditions back in the Desert days of the Second World War. 
SAS founder, David Stirling had ruled that if a soldier had distinguished himself on operations, he was eligible to wear his coveted operational parachute wings on his left breast instead of on his right arm. 
It was this prestigious award that the Rhodesians wanted for their own outstanding operators, those who had done a series of good jobs or a single task. Yet the army hierarchy would not hear of it. And the Air Force objected to the Brown Jobs wearing wings in a traditional Blue Job position. 
Undeterred, the SAS continued to push for it, but it was not until late 1978 that the unique Wings on Chest award was finally given official blessing. 
A special committee, comprising the CO the past COs, the RSM and squadron commanders sat to decide who warranted the honour. Even the trooper had his say, making his recommendations to his NCO who would pass it up through the chain of command. 
The standard that was set was high and there were many who felt that had a recipient been in any other unit, he would have been recommended for a Bronze Cross of Rhodesia. Certainly, some who had the BCR valued their Wings on Chest more. It was, after all, a measure of how their fellow soldiers rated them - the greatest test of all. 
On January 5, 1979, history was made when SS past and present Rhodesian SAS operators received their Wings on Chest award at a special open day held at their new barracks at Kabrit. Several others received them later in the year . 
The occasion also marked the dedication of a SAS marble memorial plinth, an impressive and everlasting tribute to the war dead killed on operations since January 1, 1964. 
But the war was far from over and within a week one more name was eligible to be added to the plinth. It was that of Sergeant Clive Chipo Cripps, killed when the SAS was ambushed while deploying to the operational area. There would be other names too and one of them would be Trooper Richard Hickman, son of the Army Commander General John Hickman. 