Until the sixties, Rhodesia had never had a regular white Army, just a black.regular Army with a staff corps of white instructors: But all that was about to change. 
The Central African Federation. the regional political structure, which linked Southern and Northern Rhodesia and Nyasaland had been encouraged and established by the British Conservative Government It involved five governments - Britain, the Federal Administration and the three territories - the premise being that in unity there was strength. 
Each of the three territories was at a different stage of development when the Federation was formed in 1953. Southern Rhodesia had been self-governing since 1923. Northern Rhodesia (Zambia) was well on the way to achieving a similar status. white Nyasaland (Malawi) was still under colonial rule.
Southern Rhodesia, because of its more powerful economy and larger white population, tended to dominate the Federation as did their armed forces. 
Economically, the Federation proved a tremendous success and there was great expansion in all fields. The hydro-electric project at Kariba was built, there was vast industrial development and there was a fine system of trunks roads laid down to link the Federation’s main centers. 
Yet despite the many advantages of what was a most complicated structure, the Federation was bitterly opposed by Africans who felt the whole plan had been imposed on them. Indeed, black nationalist, Joshua Nkomo stood up at a conference in London to state he rejected the idea. The British knew of this opposition and yet they still went ahead and created the Federation. 
It was the era of decolonization. Self-determination and black nationalism were sweeping down Africa and the Africans in the Federation wanted their own independence, not junior partnership in the white-dominated land. They wanted Britain to dismantle the Federation and hand over power to the people. 
In 1959, African National Congress parties in each of the component territories began a deliberate campaign of rioting and intimidation. In Southern Rhodesia, the party was banned and the leadership placed behind bars, but the rioting, intimidation, crop-burning, cattle-maiming and assaults continued.
Under heavy pressure from the nationalists. the British sent a commission to Africa and the outcome was a suggestion that the Federation be dismantled. 
This was not acceptable to the Federal Government ... and it became obvious that the Federal Army’s structure needed alteration and expansion to cope with the internal political factors. 
There were four African battalions in the Federation as well as a white territorial force, but it was felt that should the need arise, these would prove inadequate. 
In an era of black nationalism, something had to be done to strike the balance between white and black units. It was decided that force levels would have to be increased by recruiting Europeans into newly-formed regular all-white units, which, as Federal forces, would be made available to any of the three territories. 
Rearmament was to be stepped up and the Army was to be re-equipped with self-loading rifles(SLR). Ironically, to test the political attitude of the British Government, requests for help were sent from Salisbury - and met.
These included the delivery of several thousand SLRs with associated spares and tools, the provision of Ferret scout cars and training facilities, and the right to recruit openly in Britain.
During the negotiations, several force level options were studied. They included raising one infantry battalion (The Rhodesian Light Infantry) and one armored car squadron (The Selous Scouts). Another suggestion was that a parachute squadron be formed to be called C Squadron, Special Air Service, after the Rhodesian unit which had served in Malaya. 
But first, it had to be discovered if regular parachuting, including basic training, was in fact possible in Central Africa, for the landing height would be well above sea level and landings could be expected to be harder. 
A Parachute Evaluation Detachment was formed to find this out and to examine the practicalities involved in forming and training the SAS Squadron. The officer commanding was Squadron Leader Errol Minter, of the Royal Air Force, who had arrived from Britain in 1960. 
The Parachute Evaluation Detachment comprised black and white volunteers from the Army and Air Force, and Lieutenant Ian Barclay-Loggie, who came directly to Rhodesia from the British Parachute Regiment 
Initially the instructors concentrated on physical training to ensure that the volunteers were brought up to a reasonable standard of fitness. The chief instructor for this phase was “arch fiend”, Colour Sergeant Bob Bouch, an Irish giant of a man, also known as “Troat”. as whenever he instructed in unarmed combat he constantly urged his pupils to seize the enemy by the “troat” and squeeze the life from him. 
After that came the parachute training. The first military parachute descents in Rhodesia were in the form of a demonstration for members of the PED at New Sarum air base. Salisbury, and carried out by Chief Technician Bill Maitland. Lieutenant Barclay-Loggie and Sergeant George Sizeland Less than a week later the course members made their first descents outside Salisbury to be followed by further jumps in Lusaka (Northern Rhodesia) and Lilongwe (Nyasaland). 
After Squadron Leader Minter’s submissions. it was decided to go ahead with the formation of an SAS Squadron. 
Volunteers were called for from the Royal RhodesianAir Force, to undertake training to qualify them as parachute jumping instructors and from Army personnel to be instructed in SAS selection and training methods. The Air Force volunteers were to train at Abingdon, near Oxford, England, where the SAS men were also to undergo a basic parachute training course. 
The inclusion of the SAS met considerable opposition – largely based on ignorance - from many serving. senior and middle-grade officers with limited or no combat experience. 
Nor did they care for the creation of an elite band who would, inevitably, attract to themselves and accept for service only those officers and men of the highest quality. 
This thinking was easy to understand and deserved sympathy. The country was huge and the Army tiny in proportion. Even so, the quality of all ranks within it, prior to the expansion, was extraordinarily high. Cadets going to Sandhurst were expected to, and often did, figure in the top graduating ten places. Several Swords of Honour and Merit Prizes were won over the years, a distinction indeed, in such a highly competitive field. 
By early 1961, the financial arrangements were concluded for the new units and staff plans made. Concurrent recruiting for the new units began in Britain, in Rhodesia and in South Africa with a trickle from elsewhere. 
A small team, the nucleus of the resurrected C Squadron, was selected and plans made to attach it to 22 SAS in Britain for several weeks, after which, they were to return home to form the squadron. 
Those chosen were the OC designate, Major Courtenay Welch (ex-Rhodesian African Rifles); Captain Jack Crutchley the 2IC. (ex-Sword of Honour Winner King’s African Rifles); Lieutenant Dick Tilley, a signals officer who was to be OC of the signals troop; W02 Stan Standish, an Amhem veteran and ex-2nd Parachute Battalion member who was to be the Squadron Sergeant Major. Bob Bouch, who was to be the physical training instructor and Acting Corporal van der Merwe, a volunteer from the RLI. 
With no precise idea of how best to prepare themselves, they aimed to become physically fit and as professionally proficient as they could in the limited time available. 
The program they set themselves, they were to find out later, was a good deal tougher than the selection course at Hereford.
Welch recalls one grueling forty-mile trek across the Matabeleland bush, one of the most rugged parts of the Federation, full of scree, scrub and dense undergrowth, ravines and valleys. He rubbed up an enormous blister on his heel, which eventually burst 
Later that night, the footsore, wet and bedraggled group arrived at a remote American mission station where it was at first assumed they were a band of robbers. After having been well fed, they were required to attend a prayer gathering at which the Almighty was asked to give strength to “these boys fallen from the sky and to lessen their hardship”. There was a twinge of approval from Welch’s heel, and muttered insubordination from his inferiors. 
After some weeks, they were more than ready to go to Britain, but inter-government delays held up their departure until April, 1961. 
Eventually, the Rhodesians arrived in Bradbury Lines, the home of 22 SAS in Hereford, England Everyone was very accommodating but there appeared to have been no plans made for their training. 
At this time, 22 SAS were still regretting the passing of the Malayan Emergency and were striving to create for themselves a major role in Borneo, which they eventually did, with high distinction.
The UK, for them, was a place to recruit, train and rest in. Operations were, so far as they could see, always likely to be overseas, and to them the Rhodesians were a mild curiosity and a big nuisance, distracting them from their main aim. 
But the visitors were persistent. They wanted to do everything, try everything and learn everything. To this end, they completed their basic parachute course at Abingdon, went on a regimental exercise to Denmark, took the selection course, sampled canoeing, rock climbing, navigation and the art of demolition, and plunged into the myriad intricacies of organization and equipment.
During this time, Van der Merwe broke a leg and returned home. He did not serve with the squadron again. 
The officers mess in Bradbury Lines was of old-fashioned design, being a well-founded wooden building of impressive age. It ran on an unfamiliar almost self-help basis and only one type of dish was provided for each of the three main meals of the day. This was curry. It brewed constantly in a huge iron pot in the kitchen and was a cult-symbol from the jungle days.
The officers of 22 made no complaint, so neither did the Rhodesians. At least not in their company. Luckily, they were not there much, being more often than not chased over the Welsh mountains on their selection course. Let no one imagine these mountains to be of no significance. particularly at night with a 40lb load! 
At Abingdon, they met Flight Lieutenant Smudger Smith who had helped train the C Squadron parachutists in Malaya. He was later to go to Rhodesia on second-ment to open the Parachute Training School at New Sarum. The Rhodesian Air Force volunteers were also there at the same time before returning home to run the PTS. And so were the South Africans who started 1 Parachute Battalion in Bloemfontein (the Parabats). 
During their three-month attachment to 22 SAS, the Rhodesians went with them to Denmark for exercises with the Danish Home Guard. Since it does not get dark in early summer in those latitudes, it proved an exhausting experience. 
The whole population joined in the game, including children and pet dogs. If caught, the captive was subjected to a rigorous interrogation, the likes of which, these days, would call for an investigation by the Human Rights Organization. 
Later, when it was all over, there were wild celebrations in the Tivoli Gardens, local breweries, and neighboring establishments, during the course of which the OC designate had a chamber-pot dropped on him from a height of ten floors. T’was a glancing blow, and in a spectacular way, marked the end of the visit.
Before they left the UK, they visited Rhodesia House, where they interviewed scores of applicants for the Army, the product of a very active recruiting campaign. 
Returning to Salisbury. Court Welch became immersed in the setting up of the squadron. They decided on six Sabre (combat) troops of 17 men, the total strength of the Squadron being 184. This number was necessary as they were to be an independent unit in all respects and had to provide their own support back-up. 
The argument raged back and forth as to where they should be located. It seemed obvious they should be at New Sarum where the Parachute Training School was due to become operational in late October. 
But in the end, Ndola in Northern Rhodesia was chosen for political reasons. It had to be shown that the money was being spread across the constituent parts of the Federation. The Selous Scouts were also to be based in Ndola. For the SAS, it was a bad decision and the unit was to suffer for it.
Ndola was no place to lock up 184 young men, most unmarried and in the prime of life. They would have to be worked hard and constantly to keep them out of mischief as there was little for them to do in their spare time, and what entertainment there was, was expensive for them. The problem was to manifest itself in the state of the gate post across the entrance at the guard room. It was in constant need of repair. 
Perhaps though, the greatest disadvantage was the need to fly the squadron to Salisbury in rotation for parachute training and continuation training. Needless to say, there were accommodation and transport problems once there, and the whole business was a constant headache calling for complicated planning, which was itself dependent on the co-operation of others, hundreds of miles away. 
The cost involved in this “bussing” was just one indication of a bad choice, made for bad reasons. 
Captain Jack Crutchley, the 21C, set up the first selection courses in the Matopos mountain range which was selected because of its remoteness, lack of human habitation and for ease of control by the directing staff. 
They modeled the course on the lines of the British SAS selection course and endeavored to make their selection as stringent and all-encompassing, if not better than that of Hereford’s, within the framework of the Central African situation. Everything was done to break the men mentally and physically. 
The hot weather in the Matopos had to be taken into consideration, particularly in the endurance speed march. Bob Bouch was a merciless overseer of this, the most difficult of all tests, and he was largely responsible for setting such a high standard on the course. 
The training team was thus able to select the very best material particularly in those cases where a man was physically lagging but showed exactly the mental qualities of determination which personified the ideal SAS soldier.
The success rate of those early selection courses was very low and the training team aimed to set an extremely high standard. Careful selection was of course the first all important step on the road to making an SAS soldier into an elite specialist operator. 
The selection board never lost sight of the fact that in wartime, the SAS soldier would be called upon to operate behind enemy lines, on reconnaissance and sabotage; tasks that called for cunning and initiative as well as great endurance. 
Those early volunteers were frankly staggered by the high standards expected of them and one man could only describe selection as “bloody iniquitous”. He was one of the lucky ones. too. It is not known what the failures felt.
It was found that slightly more mature men faired better than the teenagers. The young had strength on their side, the others had stamina. 
Those lucky enough to be selected set themselves high standards and helped to set a pattern for the future. 
After selection, which included physical agility tests, initiative tests, speed marches and the dreaded endurance march, they underwent a basic course receiving a grounding in such subjects as signals, first aid, navigation, unarmed combat, demolitions and gunnery. 
They then went on to their parachute course at the Parachute Training School - the first descent being in November, 1961 - and then the “sickener” phase, Exercise All-In, which was the culmination of an intensive program. It was only after having done all this that they qualified to don their coveted SAS wings, sand-colored beret and blue stable bell. 
As for those early troop commanders, they were among the very best officers in the Federal Army. 
From time to time, the squadron planners gave recruiting talks to drum up trade at Brady Barracks in Bulawayo ... and were not too well received by the instructors. It was fairly obvious to them that they were after their best men. 
It was an uncomfortable period. This of course was common in all so-called elite units as small as C Squadron, for they simply did not have the capacity to train from enlistment and, in any case, they needed the experience that the trained men brought with them. 
In 22 SAS, they looked only at men aged 23-plus with at least three years’ service. Of necessity, the Rhodesians were taking 17 and 18-year-olds, quite often with only two months’ service. The promise that they would in time, come back as better trained men seemed hollow to the donor units since the aim of a full career in the Army was not generally held.
Men in other units too were jealous that so much was spent on the SAS, that they were traveling in their own expensive Sabre Land-Rovers, had so much access to helicopters and had their own special selection course and own specialized equipment.
Gradually, order came out of chaos and a steady stream of successful qualifiers began their basic training, were formed into the first of the Sabre troops and then went off to do their parachute training. Meanwhile, the barracks at Ndola were under construction and the vehicles and equipment issued. 
The whole business was a remarkable achievement and a huge tribute to everyone involved ... the old, the new, the planners and the trainers.
That it all came to pass in so short a time, reached such a high pitch of readiness, served so well in later years and then was cut down, is not something that the first OC, who saw it all take shape, would wish to comment upon. 
The novelty of the Army expansion and in particular tales of the supermen of the SAS, prompted much newspaper coverage. Many of the articles, seeking notoriety, exaggerated and romanticized the cold facts given by the officers. 
Eventually, they became so irritated by one sneering, persistent and uninformed sniper in the readers’ letter columns, that they asked him – a Mr Pete Morris – if he would care to give up one afternoon to take part in one of the exercises involved in the selection course. 
Mr. Morris and a group of his ex-RAP mates had claimed that Army life was not what it used to be and that the SAS’s 15-mile march through some of the roughest country in the Matopos was “a bit of a dawdle”. If he could not do it, he would offer drinks all round, he said. 
Mr Morris foolishly accepted the SAS challenge and on the appointed afternoon, in a blaze of publicity, he set off with Bob Bouch and others, duly weighed down with the standard load. 
He lasted only five of the 15 miles before collapsing in a heap in the full glare of all the cameras and under the vindictively satisfied eyes of those he had been tormenting. Mr Morris took back all he had said - then set up the beers. It was altogether a most satisfactory afternoon. 
Early in 1962, the SAS left for Ndola, driving their vehicles up in long columns. They were to share the barracks with the Selous Scouts, but being the larger unit by far, they were to administer the establishment.
Despite the SAS’s growing skills at canoeing, freefalling, demolitions and battle medicine, it became clear that the odd brigade exercise, although interesting and testing, was not enough to maintain the necessary training edge.
Something more was needed if they were not to become just a parachute squadron of infantry. 
Exercises against other troops generally cast them in conventional roles and any tendency toward their natural mode of operation called forth heated and uninformed criticism from the controlling HQ and opposing units. This was partly due to the small size of the Army, the few units that were available on account of distance, and cost and a preference for the “book” by the more senior officers who had not been exposed to post-war “revolutionary” experience. 
Whenever the chance arose, Court Welch pressed any distinguished visitor, serviceman or politician, to further their need for overseas training, preferably in an operational theatre. The political problems involved were considerable and so were those of a purely military nature. 
No one was certain whether they and the UK were friends or not and force levels were never anything but dangerously inadequate and to have a Squadron away for several months was a serious matter. 
But eventually, insistence paid off and it was agreed that the SAS should have a joint exercise in Arabia, in the East Aden Protectorate with 22 SAS in 1962. As it turned out, Welch’s plot did not go quite as planned as elements of 22 were committed to operations elsewhere in the world and only a skeleton Rear Headquarters and two Squadrons were able to take part. 
Not only would it give them the opportunity to get to know the UK SAS and get them thinking along SAS lines but it would be the first time the Squadron had operated as a unit. They had a lot to learn about the simple things of soldiering. 
The British SAS comprised troopers with several years’ service both in the SAS and in other regiments and corps before that. Some had been NCOs and had given up their rank to serve in the regiment, initially as troopers. They were therefore a self-confident outfit, maybe over-confident, operational service under their belts, a wealth of experience to draw upon, and led by equally experienced officers. 
The Rhodesians, on the other hand, were equally good material but largely inexperienced. Most had never served abroad and they had barely time to shake down as a Squadron. Some of the troopers had been on selection course only four weeks before and this general lack of experience had to be watched carefully. The exercise for them was as much personal tutoring as squadron training. This was particularly important in the wild type of terrain they were to enter. Court Welch was not sure that 22 SAS realized the situation the Rhodesians were in and felt they probably expected too much of them. 
The terrain was extraordinary and impressions were legion. Woad-covered tribesmen without a stitch of clothing ... ancient walled cities some of which contained Lancashire mill girls who married their “sheik” while he was working temporarily in the UK ... the bitter, lethal inter-village feuds ... old men with powder horns and muzzle loaders (their sons would have AKs and sophisticated machine guns). 
“Beau Geste” forts manned by 14-year-old National Guardsmen, whose signalers, without a single word of English, could send Morse with an accuracy and speed the SAS’s best could not match … the stories of the breaching of the great dam at Marib which set in train the occupation of Dhofar and the decline of the ancient Yemini civilisation ... sandstorms ... overturned Land-Rovers, the frustration of not knowing the language ... the Queen of Sheba and King Solomon .. 
A lot of this was lost on the sons of the Oud Transvaal and those from Stepney, but all were awed by the antiquity and wild glory of the forbidding land. 
It was a wonderful opportunity to encourage leadership, initiative and all those skills the Rhodesians had learned at home, especially navigation! 
It was the first tempering of the Squadron, never to be repeated abroad again, despite frantic effort. The plan had been to send them to Malaya for experience in jungle warfare, but politics once again wove webs in which to trap the simple soldier, and they did not go. 
Back home from their Arabian adventure, they returned to their familiar training cycle with large numbers of the Squadron scattered all over the country pursuing their various specialist skills of bush survival long range navigation, canoeing, parachuting, weapon handling, demolitions and matters medical. 
Truth to tell the threat was hard to define in those days, except for the ever present “internal security” scene. 
The Portuguese were still in Angola and Mozambique and seemed likely to stay there forever, despite growing security problems. General Antonio de Spinola visited Ndola from Mozambique with a monocle in his eye and a cowpat-cap on his head He seemed a spry and rather unworldly figure. And so, later, he proved to be. 
On the political front, a new Constitution had been negotiated in 1961 between Southern Rhodesian and British Governments which was to widen the franchise to bring Africans on to the voters roll. It meant that for the first time in Rhodesia’s history, Africans would have been allocated seats in the 65-member white-controlled parliament and that they would have a say in the day-to-day running of the country. 
At first, Joshua Nkomo approved the constitutional proposals, then changed his mind.
The call for nothing less than one-man-one-vote had grown and the Africans turned to violence. 
Later that year, there were again rumblings from the African nationalists and the internal situation became bad. There was much industrial unrest and some small scale burning of wattle plantations in the country’s eastern highlands. Eventually, after much badgering, Major Court Welch managed to persuade Army HQ to move the SAS south. 
This period coincided with the first troubles in the Congo and Katanga. An endless stream of Belgian refugees were fleeing south. It was clear things were changing in Africa and that they were living in troubled times. 
Having arrived in Salisbury, it was agreed to parachute troops in the Melsetter area to help quell the wave of arson in the region. It was September 1962 and it marked the unit’s first operational jump. They did not achieve much from the operational point of view, but at least it gave the Army and Air Force planners the opportunity to practice the airborne deployment of the squadron and its resupply in the field. Everyone learned a good deal and it was yet another vital step on the road to moulding a viable unit.
It was an early introduction to the area that was to become all too familiar to the security forces in later years as a major war zone. The terrain was quite different from any the SAS had operated in before, both in its immensity and the scale of the hills and valleys. 
There, too, they saw the mysterious irrigation system cut into the hillside. some said in pre-historic times. Even in those days the area seemed somehow sinister, The Honde Valley struck at once as being a prime approach route into Rhodesia from the east The valley straddled Rhodesia and Mozambique, was densely populated and obviously vulnerable. 
Halfway around the world the war in Viet Nam raged and knowing they could never get there, the Rhodesians read all they could of American special operations, and tried out those that were possible with the facilities and equipment available. 
Before the troubles ran out of steam in the south, they had the opportunity to work extensively with the recently-formed Alouette Helicopter Squadron. The Air Force, like the Army, had undergone changes and had taken delivery of more sophisticated aircraft.
The time spent with the Alouette squadrons proved to be most valuable to both squadrons, and techniques were evolved which were later to be honed by operational experience. 
Meanwhile, the Congo situation had begun to brew in earnest and massacres followed creating yet another flood of refugees. At the end of 1962, the SAS was deployed to control the main border crossing from the Congo into the Copperbelt to keep the Congolese soldiers from raiding across the border into Zambia. It called on them to dig in, an unusual occupation for SAS troops, although a program of active patrolling deep into the Congo was also to give them a good insight into the situation within. It was bad. 
At home, the politicians were highly vocal in their endeavors to save - or dismantle - the Federation, depending on who they were. South Africa seemed the only stable part of southern Africa. 
This period of uncertainty coincided with the unit’s formative years. Being so young and diverse of origin, it is not surprising that many young men began to wonder if they had made a good choice in seeking a new life in the Federation. 
Eventually, it became clear that Britain’s great African experiment was crumbling and that the Federation was destined to break up. 
It had been created by Winston Churchill’s Government by men who believe he the concept of the Empire. Their successors did not and the time came when the British, realizing the Empire was breaking up, decided to pull out of Africa. Their future lay not in the colonial past, but in an economic alliance with Europe. 
Back in Africa, the uncertainty of the situation had its effect on morale in the SAS. The unit had just got into full swing, the training had been completed, they had been to Aden with 22 – then politics had called a halt.
Some of the troops felt the unit ought to move south before the Federation broke up, as there might not be an SAS afterwards. But others felt that such a suggestion was a hot potato. To pull the SAS back to the south might be interpreted as a deliberate maneuver to give strength to the whites. 
The SAS men would just have to wait and see. 
When the crunch came, the three territories in the ten-year-old Federation were to become separate countries. Northern Rhodesia was to become an independent Zambia, and Nyasaland an independent Malawi. 
But what was to be granted to the others, was to be denied to Rhodesia. She was to enter a new era of trying to negotiate independence with the British. It was to be a long haul. 
The Federal Army, like the country, was to be carved up. Fortunately for Southern Rhodesia, the British allowed her to inherit the entire fighting force of the Royal Rhodesian Air Force, a move that enabled Rhodesia to retain air supremacy throughout the war that was to follow. 
The northern territories had no need for the wholly white units of the SAS and Selous Scouts. and it was merely a question of finding out the wishes of each person as to what he wanted to do. 
There were a number of options open to them. They could return to the south to the Southern Rhodesian Army. If they were officers, NCOs or specialists, they could stay put north of the border with the Northern Rhodesian Administration’s Northern Rhodesia Regiment. There was also a British Army option. Or they could leave army life altogether and take the generous golden handshake. 
They had to think the future out for themselves. 
As most of the troops were from Southern Rhodesia and South Africa, there was naturally a big draw to the south. 
The Rhodesian Army however was not offering much - an option to apply for a job. They stressed they could not take everybody. There were no guarantees a man would get a job; no guarantees there would even be an SAS. It was an expensive unit to run and Rhodesia had a small military budget. In short, there was little incentive for men to head south. 
The Northern Rhodesian Administration, on the other hand, could see the Army and the men with soldiering skills disappearing across the border and was making some pretty attractive offers - increased salaries and a step-up in rank, with a bonus at the end of it.
For the young troopers, it was a chance to get their hands on a bit of money, and most chose to take the handshake and call it a day. All the officers, including the DC, elected to stay in Northern Rhodesia and in the end only 31 “other ranks” volunteered for service in Southern Rhodesia. 
In the event, there was to be an SAS in the south and the new Officer Commanding was to be Major Dudley Coventry with Captain Peter Rich as his second-in-command ... and they arrived in Ndola in November, 1963, to take the volunteers and the unit’s equipment south. 
It was the parting of the ways, the beginning of a new period in Central African politics. It remained to be seen if the south could hold out against the pressures that might come. 
In the black nationalists camp, they were fighting among themselves. The Reverend Ndabaningi Sithole and his supporters - including Robert Mugabe - dissatisfied with Nkomo’s indecisive leadership, split with Nkomo and formed ZANU (the Zimbabwe African National Union). 
Nkomo, meanwhile, had fanned the People’s Caretaker Council (PCC) to continue the activities of the banned ZAPU. 
Nkomo’s supporters came from the Ndebele-orientated tribes in Matabeleland in the west, while ZANUs power base lay among the Mashona tribes in Mashonaland in east and central Rhodesia. 
Some of the most bitter incidents in nationalist politics followed as former colleagues turned on each other. Black nationalist politics were much in keeping with traditional African politics, beset by tribal and ideological differences, a situation that would not improve with the passing of time. 
It was in white Rhodesia’s interests that the nationalists continued to fight with each other, and not present a united front. In later years, Rhodesian security forces would deliberately stir things up among the different factions, for while they were fighting each other, they were not waging war on Rhodesians. 
As for the SAS, it too, was going through a difficult phase. And when those 31 volunteers pulled out of Ndola barracks to begin a new chapter in their history, it was in the knowledge that the Squadron’s strength had never been lower ... 
