As they waited in the silent darkness all eyes were fixed on the enemy headquarters. At last came the “Good luck” from the overall commander. The young Rhodesian selected to lead the attack against the headquarters, mumbled something in reply, gathered his men and headed off in the direction pointed out to him by the guide.
They stepped over a low wire, crossed a large open patch then scaled another low fence. The young officer thought it a peculiar arrangement. Then the penny dropped. Surely he had not led his men through a minefield? Then he saw a notice. It was easy to translate … Beware Mines.
Somehow, they had crossed it without mishap. The problem of how to get back would have to be sorted out later. There was going to be a lot of action in the next hour and Lieutenant Ken Harvey reckoned that an inflexible plan would be doomed to failure. He was not to know it at the time, but there were no mines there. It was merely a hoax.
Still there was no time to congratulate themselves on their good fortune. They arrived on the large expanse of lawn in front of their target. Harvey dropped off his gunners with orders to shoot anyone who appeared at any of the windows or who came out of any of the doors.
“Not the front door - we’ll be using that ourselves,” he reminded his men in a whisper.
Young and inexperienced though he was, Harvey, 19, was about to lead his small party of nine men into battle deep in enemy-held territory. The opposition would be numerically superior but Harvey and his men were banking on the element of surprise giving them the advantage.
They set up their bazooka in front of the door but soon learned it had a failure. As they gathered around to find out the cause, they suddenly heard the unmistakable crunching of boots on the gravel road and the sound of deep guttural voices.
Obviously they must not be caught red-handed messing about with their defective weapon, so Harvey got everyone to lay flat in the shadows on the lawn. He then ran to the gate by the road.
From his hiding place behind the masonry pier, he could see four sentries marching up the road a few paces from him.
Harvey did not hesitate.
He stepped into the road and the silence of the night was shattered as four shots rang out. All four men dropped dead at Harvey’s feet, killed at point blank range.
There had been no time for finesse and it was essential that they be killed immediately. But those few shots would have alerted the whole neighborhood and the raiders would have to act quickly if they wanted to achieve the best results. Besides, Harvey could not have wounded enemy lying in the road while he stormed their headquarters.
As soon as the shots rang out, his men reacted immediately and charged across the lawn to the main door. By the time Harvey got there, they were busy shooting their way in.
The opposition were shooting at them from the windows, but the partisan Bren gunners they had brought along for the purpose were doing a fine job and taking a good toll thereby easing the attacker’s job.
One man was wounded in the leg ... then Harvey gave the lock a final burst and they pushed the door. They threw in a few grenades and ran into the dark interior.
There were scuffling noises and then the bullets really started to fly. The din of the battle was deafening in such a confined space.
Holding his torch at arm’s length so as not to attract fire to himself, Harvey switched it on to enable him to see the lay of the land. He had a quick look around and the firing increased. The enemy could see him so he dived under the table torch still on. As he went to ground, his sergeant, who was close behind him, opened up and killed the main offender.
They rushed the spiral staircase but the enemy were firing over the balustrade from above and it was impossible to get past the hail of bullets ... they just did not have enough men for that sort of thing. As if to finalize that thought, someone rolled a hand-grenade down and it went off between three of the strike force. One man was badly wounded and Harvey ordered him to be taken outside.
Outside meanwhile, the overall commander, Roy Farran, who had taken along the unit’s Highland piper, got him to play “Highland Laddie” just to let the enemy know that they were contending with more than a partisan raid ... and as Harvey pressed home his attack on the operational headquarters and a second group prepared to storm another enemy position nearby, the defiant skirl of bagpipes rang out across the countryside.
When the enemy began firing at them, Farran, undaunted by such distractions, pushed the piper into a convenient slit-trench and he continued to play from a sitting position. At the second target, the attackers charged the enemy stronghold, cheering when they heard the pipes.
Over at the main target – the German 51st Corps Operational Headquarters at Albineat, Italy - the ground floor had soon been taken and no enemy remained alive. The German Chief of Staff Colonel Lemelson, was also accounted for during the furious room-to-room fighting.
Outside, the Bren gunners were continuing their work and many Germans were killed when they tried to shoot from the windows, or as they ran out of the back doors.
As it was impossible to take the house with their limited force and in the twenty minutes allowed. Harvey decided to raze the building to the ground.
They started a fire on the ground floor and helped it get a good start with some explosive they had taken along. They added some furniture to keep it going and made their exit as many valuable German maps and documents went up in smoke. They kept the Germans confined to the upstairs floor until the fire was well ablaze. Despite the accurate and determined Bren gun fire, the Germans were lobbing grenades on to the lawn, and Harvey and his men had to run the gauntlet as they dragged their wounded with them.
By now, the whole area was in a state of alarm and Germans on the road where Harvey had killed the sentries were firing towards the house.
The small band of raiders were fully silhouetted against the red glow of the blazing building and how they managed to get out of the headquarters’ confines without suffering further casualties remains a mystery.
They kept up their relentless fire from outside as more and more of the trapped enemy tried to get out of the house.
Harvey gathered his men together, assessed the position and looked at his watch. Hell! he thought, they had been there 15 minutes longer than planned. The troops involved in the other aspects of the operation would already be on their way back to the safety of their mountain hide-out.
As the strike force got thinner on the ground, the Germans would be rushing about unhindered - and there were Harvey and Co still in the middle of the hornets’ nest.
He decided to head in the opposite direction to that which they would ultimately take. He aimed to outsmart the enemy, who were likely to try and cut them off on the direct route back into the mountains.
They were extremely tired and inflicting extra distance on his men was not an easy decision, particularly as he did not know what further demands they would have to make on their stamina before they reached the comparative safety of their mountain sanctuary.
They skirted the area, walked straight through an enemy post unchallenged and cut the telephone wires. One wire turned out to be a power line and Harvey got a severe shock for his pains.
Harvey and his party joined up with the remainder of the force, quickly exchanged news and were soon on the march again. The other attack had been a success but they had lost men.
They had to get as much distance between themselves and the scene of the action in the shortest possible time. By the time they reached the safety of base, they had marched continuously for twenty-two-and-a-half hours.
The objective of their mission had been to cause panic and confusion and they had certainly done that. What’s more, the enemy now knew that they were not safe, no matter how far they were from the front line.
It had of course, been a Special Air Service operation, carried out by bold, swift, resourceful men; operators whose daring and courage have, together with that of others who followed afterwards, contributed to the legendary SAS’s special image and mystique.
The operation – codenamed Tombola – was the Special Air Service’s last and most ambitious Second World War mission. The war was all but drawing to a close in Europe when No 3 Squadron of the 2nd SAS Regiment was flown to Italy for guerilla operations behind the German Gothic Lines, the last enemy defensive position in the Apennines.
Operation Tombola differed in many respects from former SAS operations in that rather than adopt the usual hit-and-run tactics against the Germans, Commander Roy Farran and his men joined forces with the Italian partisans, set up a base in the inaccessible valleys of the Apennines and together formed an offensive force to attack the German supply lines.
Roy Farran was later awarded the American Legion of Merit, and his citation said that the SAS’s operations against enemy rear units had materially assisted the attack of the United States Fourth Corps and contributed significantly to the success of the Fifteenth Army Group.
The successful attack on the German Headquarters was a major contribution to the Allied cause and Rhodesian Ken Harvey was awarded the Distinguished Service Order for leading the attack. It was considerable achievement. DSOs are generally awarded to officers holding the rank of a least lieutenant-colonel not to humble lieutenants.
Harvey’s citation told how he had inspired his little band of men with great courage, gallantry and complete disregard for his personal safety.
“Throughout this action, Harvey was remarkable for his gallantry an cool, clear-thinking decisions. The damage he did to the whole German Army from Bologna to Massa was grievous. His behavior inspired his men to follow anywhere an officer they love and trust.”
Yet the attack on the German HQ was only one of the young Rhodesian’s successes. In view of his good showing on the headquarters, Harvey – ultimately to become Honorary Colonel of the Rhodesian SAS – was tasked to command an Independent mission... An attack on Highway 12, an important German route and a difficult target.
Overall commander Roy Farran conceded Harvey was young to lead the mission, but he had a good sergeant behind him and besides that, his enthusiasm was unbounded.
Harvey’s partisan guide, unsuitably attired in a bowler hat, led the ambush group which included the piper, to the highway. The area was thick with enemy troops and they cautiously made their way towards the road.
Suddenly there was a long burst of machine gun fire. The ambushers had been ambushed by the Germans. The piper received a nick in his elbow and the guide had his bowler hat knocked off.
Somehow, as they all fell flat and rolled for cover, the guide picked up his bowler hat, replaced it and disappeared down the hillside into the night. He would reappear a few days later complete with battle scar- and bowler hat - to tell the most hair-raising story.
Harvey and his men immediately returned fire. Killing two enemy before rapidly extricating themselves from the position.
Next time, they fared much better.
They found a new position on the inside of a large “U” in the road and took up their places in the long grass about fifty paces from the road and well in the loop.
Within half an hour, they heard the rumble of transport and were to discover later it was part of a German division withdrawing from the front to take up new positions.
Everyone was itching to start shooting as the convoy rolled ever closer to them, but Harvey had other plans. When the vehicles were well strung out and had surrounded his forces on all three sides of them, he gave the Command to fire.
They opened up with everything they had - and with great effect, too. They were rewarded for holding their fire when the enemy on each side of the “U” began firing at fellow Germans on the other side, each group thinking the other was the enemy.
They were credited with completely destroying two trucks and three horse-drawn carts, and inflicting injuries on more than 100 enemy soldiers.
When the Germans began firing at each other, Harvey ordered his men to withdraw but stayed on for a further 15 minutes by himself, fascinated by the chaos he had started and which soon developed into quite a battle.
However, he did not tempt fate too much. They were firing directly above him and some of the enemy might discover their mistake and decide to devote their attentions to the real culprits.
Next day, as a direct result of that action and the ensuing pandemonium, 158 Germans surrendered.
It was now April 1945. The war in Europe had virtually run its course and the enemy was hurriedly withdrawing under pressure from the American Fifth Army. The SAS men were soon to be feted by the local population who were beside themselves with the joy of liberation. The roads swam with the transport of the advancing Army and the amount of destroyed enemy transport paid tribute to the Air Force and the guns of the Fifth Army.
Spasmodic firing could be heard in a nearby village and was attributed to a fanatic sniper, perhaps it was the odd partisan having his last fling.
After seven strenuous weeks deep behind enemy lines, food and sleep were now foremost in the minds of the SAS men. They returned to Florence, tired, wet and cold but thankful. They went straight to their headquarters, fell on the floor and slept. The operation was over and the prospect of leave lay ahead…
