The Special Air Service all started with an ingenious plan to help defeat the German Army at a time when Britain was very much on the defensive.
A British Army unit, known as Layforce, was tasked to operate along the North African coast, where it could land on enemy beaches and move up to wreck German airfields and lines of communications. The only snag was that the plan relied entirely on the Navy to get them to the coast, and as there were no ships to spare, it seemed certain Layforce would have to be disbanded.
A subaltern, David Stirling felt that just because the Navy could not ferry them there, that was no reason to abandon the raids. Surely troops could be dropped into the target by parachute instead?
But parachuting was still in its infancy and to further complicate matters, there was neither parachute expert nor the necessary equipment in the Mediterranean area.
Then, Stirling’s fellow officer Jock Lewis laid his hands on fifty parachutes which had mistakenly and fortuitously been unloaded in Alexandria. He obtained permission to experiment with them and Stirling joined the trials.
Lewis, Stirling and two others rigged up their own static lines in an ancient Valencia aircraft by fastening them to the chair seats of the plane. Then the four men, none of them a trained parachutist, leapt out of the plane.
Only Stirling was unlucky. His parachute caught on the tail and ripped holes in the canopy. He smashed into rocky ground so hard and injured his back so severely that both legs were temporarily paralyzed.
Undeterred, he used the time spent in hospital to plot a scheme for special operations in the Western Desert to hit the Germans in the heart of their own territory.
He argued that it was not necessary to use large groups for in-depth penetration operations behind enemy lines, where, because of the great numbers involved, the element of surprise was often lost. What was needed was a unit which could combine minimum manpower demands with maximum possibilities of surprise.
Great advantage could be derived from the element of surprise and the protection of the night.
The desert made his plans feasible. The fighting between the two armies was concentrated along the coast road, and the Germans had a very vulnerable flank in the form of a vast expanse of unguarded desert. A handful of men dropped by parachute deep behind enemy lines could hide by day, attack German airfields by night, then slip away under cover of darkness.
It was an ingenious plan. Now all he needed was permission. But there was no time for bureaucratic red tape. He had to bring it to the immediate attention of the hierarchy.
After failing to bluff his way past the sentry at the Headquarters Middle East Command in Cairo, he scaled the fence and hobbled of as fast as his injuries would allow.
He eventually found the Deputy Chief-of-Staff, Middle East Forces, General Ritchie explained he had come on vital business and handed him a pencilled memorandum. 
Soon afterwards. Stirling was given permission to recruit 66 men from what was left of Layforce and told the unit was to be called L Detachment of the Special Air Service Brigade.
Stirling immediately recruited Jock Lewis, an Oxford graduate and rowing blue. Later, when the SAS got its own cap badge and insignia, the colors of light and dark blue were chosen because in the original unit there was a representative of each of the Oxford and Cambridge boat race crews – Lewis of Oxford, and T.B. Langton of Cambridge. 
The Winged Dagger design symbolized the legendary King Arthur’s Excalibur, a sword to win freedom from the invader. The Egyptian-looking wings were inspired by a fresco in a well-known Cairo hotel. The motto chosen was “Who Dares Wins”. It was to prove an apt choice. 
Training the hand-picked volunteers began at Kabrit, a small village 160 kilometres (100 miles) from Cairo. Unfortunately, the SAS’s first operation ended in disaster when, due to severe sand storms, landmarks were obliterated and the airborne parties were dropped in the wrong area. Aircraft were lost and men swept away. 
The force that took them back to safety was the vehicle-borne Long Range Desert Group, a reconnaissance and intelligence unit Stirling could see the advantage of using the LRDG and initially they were used to transport the SAS to their targets.
The SAS, collaborating with the LRDG, destroyed 100 German planes within a few weeks. A Rhodesian, Mike Sadler, acknowledged as the best navigator in the Western Desert, was to transfer from the LRDG to the SAS. 
By the end of the desert war, 400 enemy aircraft had been destroyed by SAS raiding parties. It was the type of classic operation latter-day SAS men longed to do and it would not be until the Falklands War of 1982 against the Argentinians that they would get their chance to once again destroy enemy aircraft on the ground.
The SAS pioneers also destroyed workshops and hangars full of spares ... hijacked lorries … mined roads ... set petrol dumps alight and demolished enemy railway lines. Thousands of Germans had to be diverted from other military tasks to try and guard the scattered airfields and vulnerable lines of communication from daring SAS attacks. 
Adolf Hitler recognized the Special Air Service men’s qualities only too well. In a back-handed compliment he ruled: “These men are dangerous. They must be hunted down and destroyed at all costs.” 
Such was David Stirling’s fame that, German radio was soon referring to him as The Phantom Major. He featured in Erwin Rommel’s diaries and tales of his exploits spread throughout the Eighth Army. 
As the war in Africa drew to a close, the SAS featured in daring exploits in Sicily, Italy, Belgium, Holland, Germany and France where they also trained the French Resistance Movement.
In September, 1944, the ADC to General F.A.M. Browning, KB, DSO, broadcast to SAS men still behind German lines: “The operations you have carried out have had more effect in hastening the disintegration of the German Seventh and Fifth Armies than any other single effort in the Army.”
When the fighting was over and there was no longer a need for the SAS, I Regiment SAS (the original L Detachment), 2 RegimentSAS and HQ SAS were disbanded. The Belgian and French Regiments were handed over to their respective armies and retained. 
For the British, it seemed the SAS days were over, but after a War Office analysis of the role the specialized force played during the war, it was realized that it would be ridiculous to let all that invaluable knowledge and experience go to waste. The SAS was reborn as a territorial unit and merged with the resurrected Artists Rifles to become 21 SAS (Artists).
